Boeing Explores Sale of Space Business
New CEO explores options for Starliner and NASA space station in quest to rescue manufacturer
By 
Sharon Terlep
 and 
Micah Maidenberg
Oct. 25, 2024 12:22 pm ET

Boeing BA -0.12%decrease; red down pointing triangle helped put the first men on the moon. Now it wants to get out of the space race.

The beleaguered company is exploring a sale of its storied NASA business, including the troubled Starliner space vehicle and operations that support the International Space Station, according to people familiar with the matter.

The effort, part of a strategy by Boeing’s new Chief Executive Officer Kelly Ortberg to streamline the company and stem its financial losses, is at an early stage and might not result in a deal.

Boeing faces a deepening financial crisis. Its largest labor union has rejected two contract proposals and extended a strike that has halted most of its airplane production. Meanwhile, Boeing’s space and defense projects have been hobbled by delays and cost overruns.

For decades, the company has worked hand-in-glove on big National Aeronautics and Space Administration programs, including the Apollo astronaut missions and creating the space station. In recent years, SpaceX has supplanted Boeing’s role as a top agency partner. NASA recently opted to have two astronauts wait months for a ride back from the ISS on a SpaceX craft after problems emerged on Starliner’s first-ever human spaceflight. 

Boeing is expected to keep its commercial and military satellite businesses and position overseeing the Space Launch System, some of the people said. The SLS is a huge rocket NASA is paying the company to build to start future lunar-exploration missions. The rocket successfully completed its first flight for NASA about two years ago, though Boeing has faced production challenges and quality-control issues with the system.

Boeing and its partner Lockheed Martin have also spent more than a year seeking a buyer for their rocket-launch venture, called the United Launch Alliance. The 50-50 venture operates separately from its parents and focuses on U.S. national-security launches. It is ramping up flights on a new rocket called Vulcan Centaur that will replace older vehicles.

Ortberg, who took over as Boeing CEO in August, said he was weighing asset sales and looking to jettison problematic programs. Beyond the core commercial and defense businesses, he said, most everything is on the table. 

“We’re better off doing less and doing it better than doing more and not doing it well,” Ortberg said in a call this week with analysts. “What do we want this company to look like five and 10 years from now? And do these things add value to the company or distract us?”

Ortberg fired the head of Boeing’s defense and space business in September. The space business is a small part of that unit, which makes jet fighters and helicopters for the Pentagon and had a $3.1 billion loss on $18.5 billion in revenue in the first nine months of 2024. 

Before Ortberg joined, Boeing held discussions with Blue Origin, the space company owned by billionaire Jeff Bezos, about taking over some of the NASA programs, people familiar with those discussions said. Blue Origin has been preparing its own rockets for future NASA and commercial missions and to compete with SpaceX.

Both the Starliner program and Boeing’s work for the ISS face uncertainty, whether the company ultimately sells them. NASA wants to deorbit the space station around 2030. 

Last month, meanwhile, the agency said it was still analyzing next steps for Starliner, including how the vehicle would secure a NASA stamp of approval to begin regular astronaut missions. NASA also said that Starliner wouldn’t fly one of those flights in 2025, a break from plans it made earlier this year. 

Agency officials for years have hoped to have Starliner available to transport astronauts to and from the space station, giving NASA a second U.S. vehicle beyond SpaceX’s Crew Dragon. 

Key Boeing Moments in Space
Saturn V: (1969 to 1972) Boeing played key roles in building the Saturn V rockets used to launch the Apollo missions to land American astronauts on the moon.
Space Shuttles: (1976 to 2011) Boeing bought Rockwell International in 1996, which built six of the shuttles. Boeing and Lockheed Martin were also part of a venture that oversaw shuttle operations.
Space Station: In 1993, NASA chose Boeing as the prime contractor for the International Space Station, a research laboratory that has now been in orbit for 25 years.
Crew Capsules: In 2014, NASA hired Boeing and SpaceX to develop crewed vehicles to transport astronauts to the ISS. SpaceX has pulled ahead with its Crewed Dragon, compared with Boeing’s Starliner. 
SLS Rocket: In 2022, the Space Launch System rocket, with Boeing as a main contractor, successfully launches NASA’s Artemis mission, a plan to return astronauts to the lunar surface.