Boeing Makes New Offer to Union in Hopes of Ending Strike
Proposal calls for 30% raise over four years, up from 25% previously; workers have until Sept. 27 to ratify
By 
Sharon Terlep
Updated Sept. 23, 2024 9:41 pm ET




307

Gift unlocked article

Listen

(3 min)



Union members demonstrate near a Boeing factory in Everett, Wash., last week. Photo: Manuel Valdes/Associated Press
Boeing BA -0.12%decrease; red down pointing triangle on Monday made a new offer to its striking machinists union in hopes of ending a walkout that is costing the cash-strapped jet maker hundreds of millions of dollars a week.

The proposal comes 11 days after Boeing’s biggest union rejected a tentative contract and overwhelmingly voted to go on strike. 

Union officials said Monday that they had no input into the new offer and criticized the company for sharing it with union members and the news media. 

“This proposal does not go far enough to address your concerns, and Boeing has missed the mark with this proposal,” the union said in a note to members. “They are trying to drive a wedge between our members and weaken our solidarity with this divisive strategy.”

Boeing Union Votes to Strike, Halting 737 Production
You may also like

Boeing workers voted to strike, shutting down production on a range of jets. WSJ’s Sharon Terlep breaks down the reasons behind the strike and what it means for the struggling aerospace giant. Photo: Chona Kasinger for WSJ
Boeing’s latest offer calls for a 30% pay increase over four years, up from the 25% in the previous deal. It also doubles the ratification bonus to $6,000, restores annual bonuses the company initially proposed to eliminate and increases company contributions to employee 401(k) plans. Boeing said it would keep its commitment to build its next new airplane in the unionized Pacific Northwest.

The company said it would give the union until Friday to vote on the deal; the union said it would need more time than that to present details to members and secure voting locations.

Boeing last week rolled out a series of cost-cutting moves including a hiring freeze, temporary furloughs and executive pay cuts for the duration of the strike. The jet maker had been burning through roughly $1 billion a month before the strike and credit-ratings firms warned that a prolonged work stoppage would lead them to downgrade Boeing to junk status. 

Boeing’s 33,000-member machinists union walked out Sept. 13 after rejecting a labor deal recommended by its leaders. The union and company briefly returned to the bargaining table last week, with help from a federal mediator, before breaking off talks on Wednesday. 

The deal that the union voted down on Sept. 12 would have bolstered retirement benefits, lowered healthcare costs and committed Boeing to building planes in the Pacific Northwest. Union leaders had been seeking a 40% pay raise over four years.

The new offer doesn’t restore pensions that the company eliminated in 2014. Union leaders have said they want to win back pensions, while acknowledging they likely will need to compromise.  