Boeing Defense Chief Exits Company
Ted Colbert led unit plagued by losses, production delays and Starliner program that stranded two astronauts in space
By 
Sharon Terlep
Updated Sept. 20, 2024 5:54 pm ET


Gift unlocked article

Listen

(2 min)

Ted Colbert is the first major executive to depart since Boeing’s new CEO took over. Photo: ali haider/Shutterstock
The chief of Boeing’s BA 0.32%increase; green up pointing triangle troubled defense and space division is leaving the company.

Boeing veteran Ted Colbert is the first major executive to depart since Kelly Ortberg took over as CEO last month. Colbert oversees Boeing’s defense unit, which has been bogged down by losses, production delays and cost overruns, as well as the Starliner spacecraft program that has left a pair of astronauts stuck in space. 

“Our priority is to restore the trust of our customers,” Ortberg wrote Friday in a memo to staff announcing the change. 

Steve Parker, the division’s chief operating officer, will temporarily oversee the defense division, Ortberg said.

The defense business is just one of several challenges facing the manufacturer. A strike by Boeing’s largest union has halted production of the 737 and worsened the jetmaker’s cash crunch. The company is furloughing tens of thousands of white-collar employees in an effort to cut costs and avoid a credit-rating downgrade.

Boeing’s defense unit has taken big write-downs on several Pentagon contracts, including one to convert two 747 jumbo jets into new Air Force One jets. The unit is also part of a joint venture that built the Air Force’s V-22 Osprey which crashed off the coast of Japan during a routine training mission in November, killing eight. The Air Force said a catastrophic gearbox failure caused the crash, though crew actions contributed.

The Starliner returned from the space station this month without its crew. Technical issues with the vehicle turned what was expected to be an eight-day trip into a monthslong stay on the International Space Station for NASA astronauts Barry Wilmore and Sunita Williams, who will return on a SpaceX capsule in February.