Boeing Furloughs White-Collar Workers as Strike Worsens Cash Crunch
CEO Kelly Ortberg says he will take a pay cut; credit-ratings firms have warned of a downgrade
By 
Sharon Terlep
Updated Sept. 18, 2024 11:14 pm ET


Gift unlocked article

Listen

(3 min)


Boeing’s largest union is on strike. Photo: Scott Brauer/Zuma Press
Boeing BA -0.12%decrease; red down pointing triangle is furloughing tens of thousands of white-collar employees in an effort to cut costs and avoid a credit-rating cut in the midst of a strike by its largest union.

The jet maker will furlough affected employees for one week out of every four weeks for the duration of the walkout, Chief Executive Kelly Ortberg wrote in a memo to employees Wednesday.

The strike, which has halted production of the 737 and other jets, could cost the manufacturer some $500 million a week, according to one analyst estimate. The company’s operations had been burning about $1 billion a month before the strike. Credit-rating firms warned that they might downgrade Boeing if the strike drags on. Moody’s and Fitch both rate Boeing a notch above junk status.

“While this is a tough decision that impacts everybody, it is in an effort to preserve our long-term future and help us navigate through this very difficult time,” said Ortberg, who added that he and his executive team will take a pay cut for the duration of the strike.

Boeing Union Votes to Strike, Halting 737 Production
You may also like

Boeing workers voted to strike last week, shutting down production on a range of jets. WSJ’s Sharon Terlep breaks down the reasons behind the strike and what it means for the aerospace giant. Photo: Chona Kasinger for WSJ
The executives’ pay will be cut by 25%, according to people familiar with the matter.

Boeing earlier this week said it would freeze hiring and pay increases, among other cost-cutting measures.

A union representing some 17,000 Boeing engineers—about 10% of the overall workforce—said its contract with the company prohibits furloughs and, in the case of layoffs, requires company payouts to idled workers. Federal law requires employers of a certain size to give 60 days’ notice to workers when conducting big layoffs, with some exceptions.

Newsletter Sign-up

What’s News

Catch up on the headlines, understand the news and make better decisions, free in your inbox daily. Enjoy a free article in every edition.


Preview

Subscribe
A spokesman for the union, known as Speea, said the company hadn’t approached it as of Wednesday to discuss either furloughs or layoffs.

The plane maker’s 33,000-member machinists union walked out Friday after rejecting a labor deal that would have offered 25% wage increases over four years, bolstered retirement pay and guaranteed that Boeing would build its next airplane in the unionized Pacific Northwest. The agreement fell short of the 40% pay increase the union had sought. 

The company and union restarted negotiations Tuesday with help from a federal mediator and continued them Wednesday. The union’s bargaining committee, in a message to members, expressed frustration with Boeing. 

“The company was not prepared and was unwilling to address the issues you’ve made clear are essential for ending this strike: Wages and Pension,” the union told members.

Longtime Boeing workers have expressed anger and bitterness over union concessions dating back to 2008, including the elimination of pensions and Boeing’s decision to build its 787 Dreamliner at a nonunion factory in South Carolina. Union leaders have said they want to win back pensions but are willing to consider alternatives to bolstering retirement benefits. 