Boeing Freezes Hiring, Delays Pay Raises as Strike Worsens Finances
Company instituted several cost-saving measures to preserve cash; no more first-class travel
By 
Sharon Terlep
Follow
Updated Sept. 16, 2024 4:28 pm ET



Gift unlocked article

Listen

(4 min)



Boeing workers waved picket signs Sunday near the company’s factory in Everett, Wash. Photo: Lindsey Wasson/Associated Press
Boeing BA -0.12%decrease; red down pointing triangle said it would freeze hiring and delay pay increases for its salaried workforce as the jet maker grapples with financial fallout from a strike launched Friday by its largest union.

The company announced the cost-saving measures in a memo to staff on Monday and said it would also cut back orders from suppliers for its 737, 767 and 777 jets. The memo said Boeing also was considering temporary furloughs for employees and executives. 

A strike could cost the manufacturer some $500 million a week, according to one analyst estimate. The company’s operations had been burning about $1 billion a month before the strike, and credit-ratings firms warned they may downgrade Boeing.

“This strike jeopardizes our recovery in a significant way, and we must take necessary actions to preserve cash and safeguard our shared future,” Boeing Finance Chief Brian West said in Monday’s memo. 

You may also like

Tap For Sound
Boeing workers voted to strike on Thursday, shutting down production on a range of jets. WSJ’s Sharon Terlep breaks down the reasons behind the strike and what it means for the struggling aerospace giant. Photo: Chona Kasinger for WSJ
The jet maker’s 33,000-member machinists union walked out Friday after rejecting a labor deal struck between the union’s leaders and Boeing executives. The contract offered 25% wage increases over four years, bolstered retirement benefits, lowered healthcare costs and committed Boeing to building planes in the unionized Pacific Northwest. Union leaders were seeking a 40% pay raise over four years.

Executives cited Boeing’s debt load and ongoing issues in pleas to workers ahead of Thursday’s contract vote.  

Union leaders, who unanimously approved the tentative contract rejected by the rank-and-file, are surveying members to determine priorities as they prepare to restart negotiations with the company on Tuesday.  

Boeing workers have said the proposed wage increases were too small after a decade of stagnating pay and the rising cost of living in the Pacific Northwest. About 94% of members of the International Association of Machinists and Aerospace Workers chapter voted to reject the contract.

The union’s members had never rejected a contract recommended by its leaders. Before their last deal, in 2008, negotiations led to a 57-day strike that stymied production and cost the company an estimated $100 million a day.

“Our confidence radiates from every picket line as we seize control of our future,” the union’s bargaining committee said in a note to members Friday. “We are ready for the long haul.”

Among the other changes announced Monday, the company is eliminating all first and business-class air travel, including for executives. It also is pausing spending on outside consultants and temporarily releasing nonessential contractors.

Boeing said it is pausing charitable contributions as well as advertising and marketing spending. The company will no longer have catered meal and food services at its facilities unless it is customer related. And it is reducing its participation in airshows and trade shows.

Ratings firms Moody’s and Fitch both rate Boeing one notch above junk status. Fitch said a strike lasting one or two weeks likely wouldn’t affect Boeing’s rating, but that anything longer could. Moody’s put all of the company’s credit ratings on review for possible downgrades, citing cash-flow concerns.

Fallout beyond Boeing depends largely on how long the strike lasts.

A prolonged strike could be another setback to Boeing’s already delayed deliveries of 737 MAX jets, potentially undermining the manufacturer’s efforts to reset its relationships with airlines.

It is another complication in what has been a tricky year for airlines that have had to adapt to Boeing’s crises.

An extended stoppage also would deal a blow especially to smaller suppliers that had just begun to recover from the pandemic and Boeing production shutdowns following fatal MAX crashes in 2018 and 2019.