Why 96% of Boeing’s Machinists Voted to Go on Strike
Boeing workers say the cost of living in the Pacific Northwest is squeezing their households; retirement and health benefits have eroded
By 
Sharon Terlep
Follow
 | Photographs by Chona Kasinger for WSJ
Updated Sept. 13, 2024 8:01 pm ET




531

Gift unlocked article

Listen

(7 min)


RENTON, Wash.—Boeing’s striking factory workers agree on one thing: They’re unhappy. If you ask them why they feel that way, you’ll hear many different answers.

Along the picket line outside Seattle on Friday, company veterans expressed anger and bitterness about union concessions over the past 16 years that have eroded retirement and health benefits. Recent hires in their 20s are crunching the numbers, eyeing the ever-increasing cost of living and the company’s stagnant starting wages. 

The array of competing demands presents a challenge for union leaders and Boeing BA 1.67%increase; green up pointing triangle executives as they try to figure out how to end a walkout that has halted production of the 737 and other jets and threatens to sink the plane maker into an even deeper production crisis. Talks are scheduled to resume early next week with a federal mediator.

Hau Vo, 43 years old, left a job in construction six months ago to work for Boeing. The pay at Boeing was lower, but the benefits were better, he said. His income supports his wife and two young children, and the family’s household budget has become increasingly tight. 

“We’re not building toy cars for Walmart. We’re building a plane that puts people in the air,” Vo said. He stood across the street from a Boeing sign that read, “Join our team.” 

Vo and thousands of other machinists walked off the job shortly after midnight Pacific time Friday, rejecting a labor deal struck between the union’s leaders and Boeing executives. The tentative contract had offered a 25% wage increase over four years. 

Leaders of the 33,000-member International Association of Machinists and Aerospace Workers chapter said about 94% of the members voted to reject the contract and 96% voted to go on strike. Union members Friday said the overwhelming vote was a strategic show of force, intended to extract a better offer from the company. Most said their anger was directed at the company—not at the union leaders who crafted the failed deal. And most said they expected the strike to last weeks, not months.


Vaughn Johnson picketing on the first day of the strike.
In front of a multistory-high mural of a Boeing jet, picketers waved signs and shouted at passing cars. One sign read: “Have you seen the damn housing prices?” Drivers honked in support. Speakers thumped out music by the White Stripes as workers chatted with retirees and members of other unions who had come to show support. 

A flood of new recruits
$70,410
62,900
60,570
60,100
59,820
56,810
56,650
55,390
54,460
53,110
Seattle
Boston
Virginia Beach, Va.
New York
Minneapolis
Los Angeles
Houston
Dallas
Chicago
Detroit
Boeing’s workforce has changed dramatically in the years since the pandemic. Legions of seasoned mechanics retired when Covid hit and in the time since. The company, meanwhile, replenished its ranks in a hiring spree that brought in thousands of new recruits, many of whom had no aerospace experience or family history tied to Boeing.

Union members who have worked on Boeing’s factory floor for years said the cost of living in the Pacific Northwest means they now have to scrape by on once-comfortable wages. They said Boeing’s pay has become less competitive with other employers in the area. That wage stagnation has contributed to attrition and exacerbated the plane maker’s manufacturing-quality crisis, they said.

Boeing is working on a new contract offer to address the union’s concerns, finance chief Brian West said at an investor conference Friday. Chief Executive Kelly Ortberg spent the past week walking the factory floor, listening to employee feedback. 


Outside Boeing’s Renton, Wash., plant on Friday.
“Kelly is personally engaged and focused on restoring trust with our people and the union,” West said. “That’s a priority—resetting that relationship.”

Daniel Dias, 35, said that his earning power has diminished in his nearly six years at Boeing, and that the proposed pay hike was paltry given inflation over the years and the fact that the full 25% wouldn’t take effect until 2027. Dias, a father of three, said he makes close to $48,000 a year. That would have increased to $51,000 in the contract’s first year, he said. 

“The cost of living has gone up exponentially and, as it stands now, we only stand to gain $2 to $3 an hour, which is not enough in today’s economy,” Dias said. 

Boeing is one of the biggest employers in the region, and a union job in its factories once promised a comfortable blue-collar life. The average annual wages for a machinist in the Seattle area is around $70,000, federal data show. That is higher than in other metro areas where many machinists work. But it is dwarfed by the compensation paid by Seattle-area tech giants such as Microsoft and Amazon.

More than a decade of concessions

The deal’s proposed pay increase was in line with contracts struck in the past year with unions representing big aerospace suppliers and U.S.-based automakers. But workers said it fell far short of making up for concessions dating back to 2008: wages that didn’t keep pace with inflation, the elimination of pensions and Boeing’s decision to build its 787 Dreamliner at a nonunion factory in South Carolina—a move viewed by workers as retribution for a strike the prior year. 

While the latest proposal bolstered the company’s contributions to employee 401(k) plans, it also eliminated annual bonuses, a trade-off many workers found galling. 

Nakry Krub, a toolmaker who came to Boeing a year-and-a-half ago from another supplier, said Boeing’s figures didn’t add up. 

“It just doesn’t make sense,” she said. “When you deduct a whole bunch of other things, we’re getting more like 9%…How can you say this is a fair contract?”

Boeing argued that, with seniority increases factored in, wage gains would have far surpassed the 25% base-pay increases. Executives said the company gave all it could as its operations burn cash and as it struggles under a mounting debt pile following January’s Alaska Airlines accident in which a door plug blew off a 737 MAX jetliner in midair. 

“It is no secret that our business is in a difficult period, in part due to our own mistakes in the past,” Ortberg said in a message to workers ahead of the vote. “A strike would put our shared recovery in jeopardy.”

Vaughn Johnson, a father of three who has worked for Boeing for 13 years, was unmoved by the plea.

“They have debt?” he said. “I have debt. I have a house. I’m the one building the plane while they’re making bad decisions.”


Boeing workers said the deal they voted down fell far short of compensating them for past concessions.