Boeing Reaches Deal With Biggest Union in Effort to Avoid Strike
Jet maker agrees to 25% pay raise as company deals with cash crunch; union membership could still opt to walk out
By 
Sharon Terlep
Follow
Updated Sept. 8, 2024 10:16 pm ET





Gift unlocked article

Listen

(5 min)



A Boeing 737 MAX aircraft being assembled in Renton, Wash. The union has sought to claw back past concessions from the plane maker. Photo: Jennifer Buchanan/Reuters
Boeing BA -0.12%decrease; red down pointing triangle agreed to increase wages by 25% for its largest union in a four-year pact aimed at preventing a crippling strike, days before a potential walkout that would further strain the embattled manufacturer.  

The jet maker, led by new Chief Executive Kelly Ortberg, is bleeding cash and falling behind on production as it deals with continued fallout from January’s Alaska Airlines accident in which a door plug blew off a 737 MAX jetliner in midair. 

The compromise won’t necessarily avert a strike when the current contract expires on Thursday. The 33,000 members of the union, who build Boeing’s bestselling 737 MAX and other jets, will vote this week and could still opt to reject it and walk out. 

Union leaders, who had sought a 40% pay raise over four years, face a membership irate over years of concessions and Boeing’s shift to nonunion labor. 

Negotiators reached the deal in Sunday morning’s early hours. In addition to a 25% pay increase over four years, the deal bolsters retirement benefits, lowers healthcare costs and commits Boeing to building planes in the unionized Pacific Northwest, a crucial union demand after the company set up a nonunion plant in South Carolina to build the 787 more than a decade ago. 

Union leadership Sunday recommended that members vote in favor of the deal. If members reject the contract and two-thirds vote to strike, workers would walk out at midnight on Friday.


Boeing Chief Executive Kelly Ortberg, in blazer, at the aircraft maker’s Everett, Wash., assembly plant. Photo: Boeing/Marian Lockhart/Reuters
“Although there was no way to achieve success on every single item, we can honestly say that this proposal is the best contract we’ve negotiated in our history,” Jon Holden, president of the International Association of Machinists and Aerospace Workers union chapter, said in a letter to members. “Financially, the company finds itself in a tough position due to many self-inflicted missteps.”

The union sought to regain benefits lost in previous rounds of talks. Under the deal, average wages would increase 33% over four years because of included seniority increases, Boeing said. 

Boeing agreed that its next new airplane would be built in Washington state if the project is launched in the life of the four-year contract, Holden said. Boeing has said it likely won’t build a new plane until the next decade. The company also committed to keeping current plane programs, including the 737, in place. 

“Our team in the Puget Sound region will build Boeing’s next new airplane. Meaning job security for generations to come,” Boeing commercial chief Stephanie Pope said in a video message to employees.

Newsletter Sign-up

What’s News

Catch up on the headlines, understand the news and make better decisions, free in your inbox daily. Enjoy a free article in every edition.


Preview

Subscribe
For weeks, members of the union had been staging lunchtime walkouts and in-plant demonstrations to pressure the company leading up to the contract’s expiration. In July, 99% of workers voted preliminarily to approve a strike if the two sides failed to reach a deal that members deemed acceptable. 

The union’s members have never rejected a contract recommended by its leaders, though dynamics around this deal are different, said Michel Merluzeau of AIR, an aerospace-industry research company in Seattle. 

The 25% increase falls short of what the union had said was a hard line, he said. And a membership with more younger workers new to the industry may be less swayed by the new-plane commitment, he said.

“How is the leadership going to sell something that in many ways is a little short of what they expected,” Merluzeau said. 

Fallout from even a short strike would cascade through the aerospace industry, further stymying airlines that are short on airplanes necessary to meet resurgent travel demand and stressing the already fragile supply chain. Boeing burned through $1 billion a month in the first half of 2024, as losses mounted amid sluggish production. Wells Fargo downgraded Boeing stock last week on cash concerns.

Why Boeing’s Quality Controls and Plane Safety Checks Still Miss Mistakes
You may also like

Boeing was given 90 days to present regulators with an action plan to address quality-control issues at its 737 factory. Here’s a look at the layers of Boeing’s quality process and the issues each faces. Photo illustration: JJ Lin
Boeing and the union have a tumultuous history. 

Their last labor deal was in 2008. Those negotiations led to a 57-day strike that stymied production, sapping the plane maker’s revenue. Three years before that, the union struck for 28 days, protesting rising health premiums and the company’s unwillingness to protect jobs from outsourcing. 

A year after the 2008 deal, Boeing established a factory in South Carolina as an alternative to the Seattle area’s heavily unionized plants. It now builds the wide-body 787 Dreamliner there with nonunion labor.

Reeling from that move, the union in 2011 and 2014 agreed to contract extensions under the threat of losing more work to lower-cost work sites. The union agreed to concessions on wages and benefits, including replacing pensions with a defined-contribution plan. That deal passed with 51% of workers voting yes. 

“They’re still fuming over the last extension,” Holden said in an interview last month. 