Boeing’s Starliner Returns to Earth Without Its Crew
NASA and the aerospace company plan to analyze performance of the vehicle after troubled months in space
Boeing’s Starliner Returns Home, Leaving Two Astronauts on the ISS
You may also like

Boeing’s Starliner Returns Home, Leaving Two Astronauts on the ISS
Boeing’s Starliner Returns Home, Leaving Two Astronauts on the ISS
Play video: Boeing’s Starliner Returns Home, Leaving Two Astronauts on the ISS
Boeing’s Starliner spacecraft, which launched in June with two astronauts on board, returned to Earth without its crew. Photo: Agustin Paullier/AFP/Getty
By Micah MaidenbergFollow
Updated Sept. 7, 2024 11:30 am ET

Save

Share

Text

Explore Audio Center
Boeing’s BA -0.12%decrease; red down pointing triangle Starliner spacecraft completed its lonesome return to Earth, a flight that carried no astronauts—but high stakes for the company.

Starliner undocked from the International Space Station just after 6 p.m. ET Friday and landed at NASA’s White Sands Space Harbor near Las Cruces, N.M., around midnight Saturday. The trip capped a difficult summer for the National Aeronautics and Space Administration and Boeing, which envisioned the spacecraft inaugurating a new chapter in human spaceflight.

The return trip of the spacecraft appeared to go smoothly, with NASA commentators on an agency livestream describing cheers and clapping among mission teams following the vehicle’s touchdown.

Earlier, during tests, a thruster on the Starliner crew module failed, but losing the device didn’t prevent the return. The vehicle’s undocking from the space station proceeded without any issues, according to NASA.

“I want to recognize the work the Starliner teams did to ensure a successful and safe undocking, deorbit, re-entry and landing,” said Mark Nappi, a Boeing vice president overseeing Starliner for the company. “We will review the data and determine the next steps for the program.”

Starliner launched in June carrying agency astronauts Barry Wilmore and Sunita Williams to the ISS. The mission was intended to last about a week and ferry the astronauts home, demonstrating the capabilities of the Boeing-built vehicle. 

Problems with Starliner prompted NASA last month to task SpaceX with returning the astronauts home in February, frustrating Boeing executives who said the vehicle could safely bring back Wilmore and Williams. Even with a successful uncrewed return, the future of Starliner, which Boeing has been developing for years, is in question.

NASA’s Plan B: Why SpaceX Is Completing Boeing’s Starliner Mission
You may also like
NASA’s Plan B: Why SpaceX Is Completing Boeing’s Starliner Mission
NASA’s Plan B: Why SpaceX Is Completing Boeing’s Starliner Mission
Play video: NASA’s Plan B: Why SpaceX Is Completing Boeing’s Starliner Mission
Two astronauts who flew to the International Space Station on Boeing’s Starliner spacecraft will return to Earth next year on a SpaceX vehicle. WSJ explores what went wrong and what this failure could mean for Boeing. Photo: NASA
NASA Administrator Bill Nelson has said that Kelly Ortberg, Boeing’s new chief executive, has indicated that the company intends to keep working on Starliner. “We expect delivery on the contract,” Nelson said, referring to the deal the agency and Boeing struck years ago for Starliner. 

NASA has already pushed off previous plans for Starliner to conduct another crewed mission early next year.

The agency and Boeing plan to conduct a monthslong analysis of how the thrusters performed during the descent, identify any potential modifications and address other issues, NASA program manager Steve Stich said during a briefing Wednesday. 


Note: Distances and spacecraft not to scale. Flight path not exact.

Source: NASA

Juanje Gómez and Peter Champelli/WSJ

Delays and unexpected problems in space programs are common, often leaving projects years behind schedule. SpaceX dealt with its own challenges developing Crew Dragon, the vehicle now set to bring Wilmore and Williams home. 

Starliner has been in the works for more than a decade, and Boeing’s struggles with software, stuck valves and other issues have led to more than $1.4 billion in losses for the company. 

SHARE YOUR THOUGHTS
What does the Starliner voyage mean for Boeing? Join the conversation below.

NASA officials have discussed whether the challenges with Starliner would count as what the agency calls a loss of mission.

Such a designation could prompt further scrutiny into the Starliner program. Under U.S. law, a mission loss would mandate creation of an independent commission appointed by the president to investigate what happened.

Certification of the vehicle—a stamp of approval from NASA allowing Boeing and the agency to begin regular astronaut missions to the ISS—also remains up in the air. Securing that status for Starliner was one of Boeing’s main goals for the June mission. 

NASA’s Stich said Wednesday that teams at the agency and Boeing are starting to look at what needs to happen to get Starliner fully certified in the future.