SpaceX to Bring NASA Astronauts Back Next Year
The decision is a setback for Boeing, which developed the Starliner vehicle that transported the astronauts to the International Space Station
By 
Micah Maidenberg
Updated Aug. 24, 2024 405 pm ET




883

Gift unlocked article

Listen

(6 min)


NASA’s Plan B Why SpaceX Is Completing Boeing’s Starliner Mission
You may also like
NASA’s Plan B Why SpaceX Is Completing Boeing’s Starliner Mission
NASA’s Plan B Why SpaceX Is Completing Boeing’s Starliner Mission
Play video NASA’s Plan B Why SpaceX Is Completing Boeing’s Starliner Mission
In yet another humiliating blow to Boeing’s reputation, two astronauts who flew to the International Space Station on Boeing’s Starliner spacecraft will return to Earth next year on a SpaceX vehicle. WSJ explores what went wrong and what this failure could mean for Boeing. NASA
Two astronauts parked at the International Space Station since early June will return with SpaceX instead of on the Boeing vehicle that brought them there. 

NASA Administrator Bill Nelson announced the decision at a briefing on Saturday, which means astronauts Barry Wilmore and Sunita Williams will remain in orbit until next February, when a SpaceX craft is scheduled to return with them on board.

“Our core value is safety, and it is our north star,” Nelson said. He said NASA wants to better understand the root causes of the technical challenges Starliner has faced.

The decision is a setback for Boeing, which has spent years developing the Starliner vehicle that transported the astronauts to the space station on June 6. During its flight to the station, several thrusters temporarily failed and engineers identified additional helium leaks within its propulsion system. 

NASA Starliner Astronauts Expected to Remain in ISS Until Early 2025
You may also like

NASA said astronauts Barry Wilmore and Sunita Williams will return from the International Space Station early next year with a SpaceX craft instead of the Boeing vehicle that brought them there. Photo Mark FelixAFPGetty
In the weeks since, NASA and Boeing have tussled over those problems, trying to determine whether they would pose any threats if the vehicle left the station carrying the astronauts. NASA and the aerospace company are preparing to undock Starliner from the space station, and transport it back to Earth in early September with no one on board. 

The decision to have SpaceX bring Wilmore and Williams back means both will spend about eight months in all at the ISS. Officials at the agency had initially planned for an eight-day mission focused on testing out Starliner, and at one point talked about getting them back to Earth in mid-June.

Nelson said he had spoken with Kelly Ortberg, the new chief executive at Boeing. Ortberg expressed Boeing’s intention to continue working on the challenges with Starliner, according to Nelson.

A Boeing spokeswoman declined to comment on the company’s plans for Starliner.


Astronauts Barry Wilmore and Sunita Williams, in a photo taken between the International Space Station’s Harmony module and Boeing’s Starliner spacecraft. Photo NASAAgence France-PresseGetty Images
Mark Nappi, a Boeing vice president overseeing Starliner, said Saturday in a message to company employees working on Starliner that the decision wasn’t the one they had hoped for. Boeing has previously said that data that the company and NASA collected about Starliner’s challenges showed that the vehicle was safe enough to conduct the return flight with both astronauts. 

Nappi said Boeing is ready to carry out actions necessary to support NASA’s new plan. “The focus remains first and foremost on ensuring the safety of the crew and spacecraft,” he said in the message.

Wilmore and Williams are Navy veterans who have tested military aircraft and traveled to space before. They have said they were amenable to spending more time than anticipated at the station, though some former NASA astronauts have said that extended, unplanned stays at the station can be tough.

The astronauts’ stay on the facility will now stretch to two-thirds of a year, with both joining a two-person crew that SpaceX is scheduled to fly to the ISS in September. The SpaceX vehicle, called Crew Dragon, will return to Earth with Wilmore, Williams and the two other astronauts in tow.


Boeing has been working on the Starliner for more than a decade Photo NASAAP
At the briefing Saturday, NASA officials said Wilmore and Williams are doing well. The agency changed the supplies sent up on a recent cargo flight to accommodate them and will do so again on a coming supply flight. 

There has been plenty of food at the ISS “No one has had to go on a diet or calorie restrictions,” said Dana Weigel, NASA’s program manager for the space station.

NASA’s call not to allow Boeing to try to return Williams and Wilmore is expected to raise questions about Starliner’s future. Boeing has been working on the vehicle for more than a decade, reporting more than $1.4 billion in losses after delays driven by software challenges, sticky valves and the spacecraft’s parachute system.

Leaders at the agency have described intense internal debates over the past few weeks over what the thruster problems and helium leaks could mean if Wilmore and Williams departed on the spacecraft. Some former astronauts have credited the agency for taking its time to run tests and evaluate data before coming to any decision. 

On Saturday, NASA officials expressed disappointment with not being able to complete the Starliner flight as planned. They said they recognized the challenges that the Wilmore and Williams families will face, given the astronauts’ extended stay on ISS. 

“I know this is a huge impact to their families, and it means a lot,” Norm Knight, a NASA flight-operations official, said at the briefing Saturday.

The decision reinforces SpaceX’s dominant role at NASA. Besides crew flights to the ISS, many of the agency’s most important efforts run through the Elon Musk-led company, including future planned moon landings, launches of research satellites and more.

“SpaceX stands ready to support NASA however we can,” said a post from Gwynne Shotwell, the company’s president and operating chief, on social-media platform X.

SpaceX in 2020 completed a test flight delivering NASA astronauts to the space station and bringing them back, building on previous cargo missions to the research facility that used a similar spacecraft. 

NASA officials for years have said the agency needed to have two different American vehicles capable of conducting crewed flights to the space station. After the space shuttle fleet was retired in 2011, NASA didn’t have a way to reach the ISS from the U.S., and instead had to purchase rides from Russia.