Boeing Finds Cracks in Structure of 777X Test Jets
Plane maker started testing new model in July with plans to begin deliveries in 2025
By 
Sharon Terlep
Updated Aug. 20, 2024 2:15 pm ET





Gift unlocked article

Listen

(3 min)



Boeing has orders for about 500 of the new 777X aircraft. Photo: jennifer buchanan/Agence France-Presse/Getty Images
Shares of Boeing BA -0.12%decrease; red down pointing triangle fell about 5% Tuesday after the plane maker found cracks in the structure of its 777X jetliner in initial test flights, the latest setback for the long-delayed airplane. 

The company said it would ground its four-plane test fleet while it replaces the faulty component and sorts out what went wrong. 

Boeing has orders for about 500 of the new aircraft that it plans to start delivering in 2025. It is unclear what impact the issue could have on the plane’s launch date. 

The 777X, designed for airlines wanting to connect the globe’s major cities and to carry some 400 passengers more, is already years behind. Boeing unveiled the plane in 2013 and said it would start delivering the model in 2020. 

The latest problem threatens to push the plane’s launch into 2026 and erode investor confidence in the program, RBC analyst Ken Herbert said in a research note. He noted that the 777X has Boeing’s third-largest tally of pending orders behind the mainstay 737 and wide-body 787.

The company started flight-certification testing in July. 

“During scheduled maintenance, we identified a component that did not perform as designed,” the company said. “Our team is replacing the part and capturing any learnings from the component and will resume flight testing when ready.”

Federal Officials Grill Boeing Execs on Lapses Leading to Door Blowout
You may also like

The National Transportation Safety Board questioned officials from Boeing and supplier Spirit AeroSystems on safety culture, part of an investigation into what caused the Alaska Airlines 737 door blowout. Photo: Kaylee Greenlee Beal/Reuters
A component called a thrust link, which is part of the structure that connects the engine to the airplane, was found to have failed following a test flight, according to people familiar with the situation. Follow-up inspections found cracks in the part on two other planes.

Boeing said no test flights were planned in the near term on any of the aircraft, and that it has notified federal regulators and customers. 

The development was earlier reported by trade publication the Air Current. 

Boeing’s efforts to launch new aircraft iterations face fresh delays amid a quality crisis that has engulfed the jet maker following January’s near catastrophe on an Alaska Airlines flight. The company also is awaiting federal certification of its MAX 10 and MAX 7 jets, also behind schedule. 

The company is also facing scrutiny of another of its jets, the 787 Dreamliner. The Federal Aviation Administration said it would require inspections of Dreamliners after an incident with a cockpit seat led to a LatAm flight plunging midflight in March.

The agency said it had received other reports of problems with the seat button causing uncommanded movement for the pilot seat, including one incident as recent as June.