Boeing Workers Reject a $23,000 Raise. What Comes Next.
By 
Al Root
Follow
Updated Oct 24, 2024, 4:27 pm EDT / Original Oct 23, 2024, 10:27 pm EDT
Boeing 
BA -0.12% employees are not going back to work just yet.

A vote to end the 40-day labor strike failed on Wednesday evening. It’s more bad news for the embattled airplane maker and Boeing BA -0.12% stock.

Stretching out the work stoppage will make investors, along with Boeing’s customers and suppliers, more nervous.

The International Association of Machinists and Aerospace Workers Union, representing some 33,000 Boeing employees in the Pacific Northwest, reported Wednesday evening that 64% of voting members checked “no” to a new labor contract.

Polls opened on Wednesday at 8 a.m. local time. Employees had until 5 p.m. to make their voices heard.

The tentative deal, agreed to over the weekend with the help of the acting Labor Secretary Julie Su, would have raised base wages by 35% over four years, along with other benefit and working-condition enhancements.

Workers at the top end of the new pay scale would have been making more than $69 an hour by 2028. Total raises over four years could have ranged from $14,000 to $35,000 a year, based on experience and job classification, with an average gain of about $23,000.

The top annual wage, excluding any overtime or bonuses, would have risen to roughly $140,000 a year from a little over $100,000. Average wages, based on union pay grades, would have risen to about $89,000 from about $66,000.

The increases would have raised Boeing’s labor costs by roughly $1.4 billion annually by the end of the contract, according to Wall Street estimates.

This is the second deal workers voted on. A tentative agreement raising wages by about 25% was overwhelmingly voted down on Sept. 12.

With the strike ongoing, it’s back to the negotiating table. Wage increases of 40% or 45% may be required to settle the strike.

“IAM [local] 751 leadership now have a vote that shows some favorability to the proposal on the table but with more needed,” wrote Wolfe Research analyst Myles Walton in a Wednesday report. “We expect a relatively quick return to negotiations (Union has said a few days) and are mindful of a U.S. election clock that might encourage a contract agreement prior to Nov. 5.” He rates Boeing stock at Buy with a $195 price target.

He added the smaller margin of defeat was a “silver lining” and sees 40% wage gains and a ratification bonus of $10,000 versus the prior offer of $7,000 enough to get a deal done.

Walton says the union’s demand for defined benefit pensions were a “non-starter.” Union members might be holding out for more as this is the first full labor negotiation since 2008, but the pension ask still doesn’t look realistic.

Without workers, Boeing can’t build and deliver planes. That leaves customers with less capacity than expected. It also means more uncertainty for Boeing suppliers. Larry Culp, CEO of MAX engine supplier GE Aerospace 
GE -0.36%
, said Tuesday that the 40-day strike hadn’t disrupted his business significantly, but acknowledged a longer strike would start to create problems.

No supplier wants to slow production, lay off workers, or spend cash to build products that will sit in inventory for months.

Boeing’s production rates have already been a problem this year. An emergency-door plug blew out of a 737 MAX 9 jet during a flight on Jan. 5. That incident led to more regulatory oversight along with less production.

Through September, Boeing delivered 225 MAX jets, about 25 a month. Eventually, Boeing wants to build closer to 40 a month.

Fewer plane deliveries put pressure on Boeing’s finances. Boeing’s third-quarter free cash flow was negative $2 billion. Still, it has some $30 billion in liquidity to weather the strike storm and its backlog represents roughly half a trillion dollars in revenue.

The strike needs to end to start harvesting the backlog. Settling the strike is high on the list of priorities for new CEO Kelly Ortberg, who took over for Dave Calhoun in August. “I met with the union leadership the first week on the job and let them know that I was committed to resetting the relationship,” said Ortberg on Boeing’s Wednesday morning earnings conference call.

There is more work for him to do, though. “Our leaders, from me on down, need to be closely integrated with our business and the people who are doing the design and production of our products,” added Ortberg. “We need to be on the factory floors, in the back shops and in our engineering labs. We need to know what’s going on, not only with our products, but with our people.”

Boeing stock fell 1.8% on Wednesday and closed at $157.06 after the company reported a third-quarter loss per share north of $10.
Earnings might have mattered less than investors suspect. Vertical Research Partners analyst Rob Stallard called the report a “non-event” since Boeing pre-announced results on Oct. 11. Wednesday’s stock volatility could easily have reflected uneasiness over the coming union vote. Stallard rates Boeing stock at Hold with a $160 price target.

Through Thursday trading, Boeing stock has fallen about 40% this year. Shares have declined about 38% since the emergency-door plug blowout. They have dropped about 5% since the start of the strike on Sept. 13.