NASA Says Starliner Astronauts Could Return With SpaceX—Next Year
Officials confirm that NASA is considering using SpaceX for return trip; Boeing says its craft is safe for crew
By 
Micah Maidenberg
Updated Aug. 7, 2024 8:21 pm ET





Gift unlocked article

Listen

(6 min)



Boeing’s Starliner spacecraft has been docked to the International Space Station since early June. Photo: NASA/AP
The astronauts who flew to orbit on Boeing’s BA -0.12%decrease; red down pointing triangle Starliner spacecraft could remain at the International Space Station until 2025, before hitching a ride home with Elon Musk.

NASA officials and Boeing have been debating whether Starliner is safe enough to return the astronauts to Earth. While Boeing has vouched for the craft, NASA officials Wednesday said that they are working on backup plans that depend on SpaceX.

The possibility that NASA would call on Musk’s space company to close out a mission Boeing has been working on for years increased in recent weeks. NASA managers are considering having SpaceX launch one of its crew vehicles to the International Space Station in September with two open seats, leaders from the agency said. 

That would leave room for Barry Wilmore and Sunita Williams, the astronauts Boeing flew to the ISS about two months ago, to potentially return with SpaceX—meaning they would remain on the station until SpaceX’s vehicle departs early next year. 

What’s News
The Wall Street Journal Whats News
NASA Says It Could Tap SpaceX to Complete Starliner Mission


Subscribe
Add to Queue
Explore Audio Center
“We don’t just have to bring a crew back on Starliner,” Ken Bowersox, a top space operations administrator at NASA, said at a briefing. 

Bowersox, a former astronaut, said Starliner’s chances of returning without the astronauts had increased over the past couple of weeks. Results from some recent tests raised concerns at NASA, officials said.

NASA is looking to make a call about next steps by the middle of this month, and no final decisions about whether to go with Boeing or SpaceX have been made. SpaceX didn’t respond to a request for comment.

Boeing said Wednesday that it still believed in Starliner. “If NASA decides to change the mission, we will take the actions necessary to configure Starliner for an uncrewed return,” the company said.

Wilmore and Williams have been aboard the space station since June 6, when they became the first astronauts to fly in Boeing’s Starliner vehicle. The temporary failure of several thrusters and discovery of helium leaks in the ship’s propulsion system turned the planned weeklong visit to the ISS into an extended stay. 

Tensions between Boeing and some NASA leaders surfaced last week when officials couldn’t agree on using Starliner, and a detailed review of Starliner’s readiness for the flight back was postponed, according to people familiar with the situation.  

“The real disagreements are how much uncertainty they view in the data” and potential risks tied to Starliner, Steve Stich, a NASA manager, said at the briefing.

Backup plans
NASA has been buying time as it deals with internal dissent over Starliner. The agency on Tuesday pushed back a planned SpaceX launch of a new ISS astronaut crew, delaying it from mid-August to Sept. 24, allowing more time to finalize return plans for Wilmore and Williams.

Should NASA ask SpaceX to fly Wilmore and Williams back to Earth, both would stay on the ISS until February 2025, when SpaceX’s vehicle is scheduled to make its return trip with four crew members on board. NASA astronauts typically spend about six months on the facility before rotating off.


Barry Wilmore and Sunita Williams in the vestibule between a module on the ISS and Boeing’s Starliner vehicle. Photo: NASA/AFP/Getty Images
Starliner’s inaugural flight has led to a summer of scrutiny on a craft that Boeing has been developing for years. NASA wants both Boeing and SpaceX vehicles available to ferry crew to the space station, which officials have said would help ensure continuous access. 

The mission originally was planned to last eight days. It has dragged out as NASA and Boeing officials assess problems with the thrusters and leaks, and what kinds of risks they might pose.

The thrusters are needed to position Starliner in space after it undocks, to prepare for deorbiting. Helium is needed to provide pressure in the propulsion system, including for a different set of thrusters Starliner needs for its return trip.  

Boeing believes that Starliner is ready to fly. The company issued a statement Friday describing the in-orbit and on-the-ground testing that it and NASA have conducted. 

Data from the testing supported “flight rationale”—NASA’s term for a space operation that is safe enough to pursue—for using the vehicle to return Wilmore and Williams, Boeing said.

A long road to orbit
Starliner is among the problems being inherited by Robert “Kelly” Ortberg, the aerospace giant’s incoming chief executive, who starts his new job on Thursday. Should NASA provide a final certification to Starliner, which Boeing is trying to secure with the current flight, the company is under contract to conduct another half-dozen flights with the vehicle. 

NASA turning to SpaceX to complete the mission would be a tough outcome for Boeing, which has deep ties to NASA that date to the Apollo moon landings.

Newsletter Sign-up

What’s News

Catch up on the headlines, understand the news and make better decisions, free in your inbox daily. Enjoy a free article in every edition.


Preview

Subscribe
Since starting development of Starliner more than a decade ago, Boeing has struggled with costly technical hurdles that put the spacecraft behind schedule and behind SpaceX. Musk’s space company has been NASA’s sole U.S.-based option for launching crewed missions to low-Earth orbit. SpaceX successfully completed its first crewed flight to the space station more than four years ago.

Wilmore and Williams have been following NASA and Boeing’s work on the challenges with Starliner, conducting scientific research and servicing equipment during their unexpected longer stay on ISS. Wilmore recently worked on assembling a centrifuge that will support future experiments, while Williams participated in a study looking into making optical fibers in microgravity.  

The space station has plenty of food and supplies, officials have said. On operational missions, astronauts stay at the station for about six months.

The astronauts, both experienced former military pilots who have traveled to the space station before, last month expressed confidence in Starliner. 

“Failure is not an option. That’s why we are staying here,” Wilmore told reporters during a July press conference from the ISS. “We’re going to get the data that we need.”