Boeing Hires Kelly Ortberg as Its Next CEO
The company also reported a $1.4 billion quarterly loss as the quality crisis in its commercial-jet business was compounded by troubles in its military business
By 
Sharon Terlep
Follow
Updated July 31, 2024 9:46 pm ET




223

Gift unlocked article

Listen

(7 min)



Kelly Ortberg, shown in 2016, ran Rockwell Collins, one of Boeing’s biggest suppliers, until 2018. Photo: Daniel Acker/Bloomberg News
Boeing BA -0.12%decrease; red down pointing triangle hired Robert “Kelly” Ortberg as its next chief executive, picking an aerospace veteran to steer the jet maker through its manufacturing turbulence and a regulatory storm after posting another deep quarterly loss.

Ortberg ran one of Boeing’s big suppliers, Rockwell Collins, until 2018, when it merged with another aerospace manufacturer and eventually ended up part of RTX. He built a reputation on Wall Street as a savvy dealmaker and worked closely with airlines and the Pentagon, before abruptly retiring in 2021.

The 64-year-old takes over an American manufacturing giant that is grappling with quality issues, production slowdowns, high-stakes labor negotiations and a plunging share price. Boeing has lost nearly $25 billion since 2020 and its operations are burning through more than $1 billion a month.

Iowa native
Ortberg is a Dubuque, Iowa, native who graduated with a mechanical-engineering degree from the University of Iowa. He started his career as a program manager in 1987 at Rockwell Collins before climbing the executive ranks to become its CEO in 2013. 

As CEO, he led the company through two large acquisitions before selling Rockwell in 2018 to United Technologies. He ran the combined company’s aerospace unit for about a year and then served as a special adviser to then-RTX CEO Greg Hayes before retiring in 2021. He remained on the RTX board.

Ortberg was one of the aerospace industry’s highest-profile executives when he retired, a move that surprised company observers. He has a long and sometimes tense history with his new employer.

When he ran Rockwell, Boeing moved to insource work on aircraft electronics that was one of Rockwell’s biggest businesses, and Boeing actively lobbied against Ortberg’s sale of the company to United Technologies. Boeing had previously sought to buy Rockwell itself before dropping out of the process. 

Ortberg was credited by union leaders and analysts for the culture he developed at Rockwell and regularly walked the production floor. He ran Rockwell’s military and commercial arms, cementing relationships with airlines and the Pentagon and navigating some of the challenges currently faced by Boeing. 

“There is much work to be done, and I’m looking forward to getting started,” Ortberg said in a news release.

Another quarterly loss
The latest quarterly results show the challenge he faces when he takes over on Aug. 8. Boeing reported on Wednesday another big loss as the quality crisis in its commercial-jet business was compounded by troubles in its military business. 

The aerospace giant said it lost $1.44 billion in the June quarter, stymied in part by its troubled project to replace the planes that will fly as Air Force One and issues with other Pentagon programs. 

Boeing continues to build fewer of its bestselling 737 MAX jets as it weeds out quality issues in the wake of January’s midair near-catastrophe, though the pace of delivery picked up in June. It is also grappling with supplier shortages slowing production of its lucrative wide-body aircraft. 

The company burned through $4.3 billion in the latest quarter, more than in the March quarter when it took a $3.9 billion hit. 

Brian West, the company’s finance chief, warned Wednesday that Boeing would burn more cash this year than previously thought, driven in part to the production delays and decisions to take on more inventory from parts makers. He said Boeing is building and delivering more planes, which should help ease its cash woes later this year. 

Outgoing CEO David Calhoun said the company is making progress. “The steps we’re taking will help stabilize our operations and ensure Boeing is the company the world needs it to be,” he said. Calhoun will stay on as a special adviser to the board until March 2025.

Boeing upended its succession plan earlier this year after a door plug fell off an Alaska Airlines flight on Jan. 5, bringing new scrutiny to its quality controls. The company said in March that Calhoun would step down by the end of the year. His heir-apparent, Stephanie Pope, was then named chief of Boeing’s commercial plane unit, where she will remain under Ortberg. 

Ortberg also inherits federal probes, congressional inquiries and regulatory scrutiny. In July, Boeing agreed to plead guilty to misleading air-safety regulators in the run-up to two deadly 737 MAX crashes in 2018 and 2019. As part of the deal, the company agreed to hire an independent monitor to oversee its efforts to improve compliance and safety programs for the next three years.

You may also like

Boeing was given 90 days to present regulators with an action plan to address quality-control issues at its 737 factory. Here’s a look at the layers of Boeing’s quality process and the issues each faces. Photo illustration: JJ Lin
Industry issues
Much of the aerospace industry is confronting supply-chain disruptions, from jet-engine maker GE Aerospace to rival jet maker Airbus. This week Airbus posted a 78% drop in second-quarter profit and told investors it would deliver fewer planes than initially forecast this year amid challenges procuring engines, fuselages and cabin equipment.

Both Boeing and Airbus continue to book strong orders for new planes from airlines looking to upgrade their fleets. Delivery delays mean their backlogs are growing. Airbus delivered 323 planes by the end of June, while Boeing delivered 175.

The new Boeing boss will face the task of integrating one of its key suppliers. Boeing recently reached a $4.7 billion stock deal to buy Spirit AeroSystems, the troubled fuselage supplier that Boeing split off two decades ago and that has been at the center of quality issues on 737 jets. 

In a regulatory filing, Boeing said it would pay Ortberg $17.25 million in cash and stock for taking the job, plus $22 million a year, of which roughly $4.5 million would be in cash and the rest in equity. Although the agreement is open-ended, the company said it wouldn’t apply its mandatory retirement age to Ortberg until April 2031.

The annual compensation figures resemble Calhoun’s pay before last year, which generally included $1.4 million in salary, a $3.4 million cash bonus and about $17 million in equity. In 2023, Calhoun received no bonus, but an equity award of $30 million.


Boeing 737 MAX aircraft are assembled at the company’s plant in Renton, Wash. Photo: Jennifer Buchanan/Reuters
—Doug Cameron and Theo Francis contributed to this article.