Boeing Talks to Buy Back Spirit AeroSystems Have Last-Minute Twist
Jet manufacturer has proposed using mostly stock to reacquire supplier
By 
Sharon Terlep
 and 
Lauren Thomas
Updated June 24, 2024 6:39 pm ET




68

Gift unlocked article

Listen

(2 min)



A 737 MAX fuselage, delivered from Spirit AeroSystems, is parked outside the Boeing Renton Factory in Renton, Wash. Photo: Paul Christian Gordon/Zuma Press
Boeing BA -0.12%decrease; red down pointing triangle has proposed funding its acquisition of partsmaker Spirit AeroSystems SPR -0.69%decrease; red down pointing triangle with stock rather than cash, according to people familiar with the matter, a last-minute twist in deal talks that comes as the jet maker burns through more than $1 billion a month.

Boeing and Spirit, a jet fuselage maker it split off two decades ago, were closing in on an all-cash deal this weekend when Boeing switched to an offer consisting largely of company stock.

The two sides discussed a deal that would have had Boeing paying more than $4 billion for the two-thirds of Spirit’s business that supplies it with parts. 

As part of the deal, Spirit will shed operations that make parts for Boeing rival Airbus, which accounts for about one-fifth of the partsmaker’s revenue. Spirit makes parts for Airbus at its factories in North Carolina and Belfast, Northern Ireland. It also makes parts for defense companies.  


Boeing had initially planned to fund the deal with cash. Photo: Kevin Dietsch/Getty Images
Terms of those deals are still being worked out, the people said. 

Boeing, which initially planned to fund the deal with cash, said in May that it was considering a variety of funding options after the company burned through nearly $4 billion in the first quarter and predicted a similar hit in the current quarter. The company ended March with $7.5 billion in cash and investments.

Spirit has been at the center of quality issues affecting 737 MAX jets. After The Wall Street Journal first reported the two sides were in deal talks, Boeing said in March that it believed buying back Spirit would improve safety and quality of its manufacturing. 