Boeing CEO Apologizes to MAX Crash Families, Calls Culture ‘Far From Perfect’
In Senate hearing, David Calhoun admits that whistleblowers sometimes face blowback from superiors
By 
Sharon Terlep
Updated June 18, 2024 6:35 pm ET




372

Gift unlocked article

Listen

(6 min)


Watch: Boeing CEO Admits Whistleblowers Sometimes Face Blowback
You may also like
Watch: Boeing CEO Admits Whistleblowers Sometimes Face Blowback
Watch: Boeing CEO Admits Whistleblowers Sometimes Face Blowback
Play video: Watch: Boeing CEO Admits Whistleblowers Sometimes Face Blowback
Boeing CEO David Calhoun acknowledged whistleblowers at the company sometimes face blowback from superiors. Photo: Manuel Balce Ceneta/Associated Press
Boeing BA -0.12%decrease; red down pointing triangle boss David Calhoun, testifying before Congress over a quality crisis at the jet maker, apologized to families who lost relatives in a pair of 737 MAX crashes and acknowledged whistleblowers at the company sometimes face blowback from superiors. 

“Something went wrong,” Calhoun said, when asked by senators about mounting claims by whistleblowers alleging retaliation after raising safety and quality concerns.

Calhoun took questions for more than two hours from a Senate subcommittee that is probing problems at Boeing, from glitches in its production process in the wake of a Jan. 5 blowout to claims of retaliation against employees who raise red flags.

Boeing has struggled with production problems that have slowed its factories to a crawl and prompted airlines to reduce flights. The manufacturing problems have sapped the company’s finances, leaving it burning through billions of dollars in cash and sending Boeing shares tumbling more than 30% this year. The Justice Department is investigating the company and the Boeing board is searching for a new chief executive to succeed Calhoun. 

Tuesday’s appearance was Calhoun’s first time being questioned in public since the door plug blew off an Alaska Airlines flight in January. The former GE executive and longtime Boeing director took over the jet maker in 2020 following a pair of crashes in 2018 and 2019 that killed 346 people.

In a room filled with family members of people who died in those crashes, Calhoun said he believes Boeing is to blame for those accidents. “I apologize for the grief that we have caused,” he said, after standing and turning to face the crowd. 

Boeing Releases Quality and Safety Improvement Plan Under Pact With FAA
You may also like

The Federal Aviation Administration said it wouldn’t lift the production cap it placed on Boeing following the Alaska Airlines accident for at least several months. Photo: Jose Luis Magana/Associated Press
Family members of victims of the 2018 and 2019 MAX crashes and earlier aviation disasters have made a concerted push to tighten regulations, craft new air-safety policies and extract penalties from companies. 

“Where is accountability when the CEOs of Boeing, management of Boeing, are walking free with millions?” said Clariss Moore, whose daughter died in one of the MAX crashes. “We wanted answers, transparency, accountability, and I wanted them to be in jail.”

Calhoun struck a largely contrite tone, sometimes agreeing with senators’ criticisms, including that the company provided the committee with pages of indecipherable data. “I would describe it just as you did and I can’t justify it,” he said to a senator who held up a sheet of paper and called it “gobbledygook.”

He said Boeing continues to struggle to recover from upheaval caused by the pandemic, which brought air travel to a near standstill and led to shortages in manufacturing and engineering talent. 

“The post-Covid moment in aerospace has been almost unbelievably difficult to navigate,” he said. Training workers has proved a momentous challenge, he said. 

SHARE YOUR THOUGHTS
Is Boeing taking the right steps to address safety concerns? Join the conversation below.

Calhoun drew a distinction between the MAX crashes, which he attributed to engineering decisions and a faulty flight-control system, and the Alaska Airlines door-plug blowout, which he said was a result of manufacturing mistakes. 

Pressed on whether the company took sufficient action in the wake of the MAX crashes, Calhoun laid out changes the company has made in how it designs planes and shapes pilot training. “I don’t think we could have taken any more dramatic steps than we’ve taken,” he said.

Late Monday, a Senate subcommittee released a staff memo that includes, among other information, allegations from a quality assurance inspector in Boeing’s 737 factory in Renton, Wash. 

The employee, Sam Mohawk, says the company mishandled faulty airplane parts and that some of those bad parts were later installed in airplanes. Mohawk says he was told by his supervisors to conceal evidence of the mishandled parts from federal regulators.

Boeing said it received the claims late Monday and is reviewing them. “We continuously encourage employees to report all concerns as our priority is to ensure the safety of our airplanes and the flying public,” the company said in a statement.

A Federal Aviation Administration spokesman said the agency investigates all reports and would do so with the latest allegations. He said the agency has seen an increase in Boeing employees reporting safety concerns since the Jan. 5 accident.


Family members of victims of Boeing plane crashes after Thursday’s Senate hearing. Photo: Mariam Zuhaib/Associated Press
Mohawk’s legal team also represented John Barnett, a former Boeing quality manager who raised concerns and died in March. A police investigation concluded that Barnett died by suicide. He worked at Boeing’s 787 factory in South Carolina.

In the months since the Alaska Airlines accident, the company has taken steps to improve quality. It overhauled employee incentives, replaced the head of its commercial airplane unit and is working to acquire a problem-prone fuselage supplier. 

Calhoun said the company has cooperated with federal probes and taken responsibility for the Alaska Airlines incident. “In our factories and in our supply chain, we took immediate action to ensure the specific circumstances that led to this accident would not happen again,” he testified.

Sen. Richard Blumenthal (D., Conn.), who chairs the subcommittee, accused Calhoun of giving priority to profits over fixing the company’s culture. “Instead of asking what has caused Boeing’s safety culture to erode, you and your colleagues in the C-suite have deflected blame, looked the other way, and catered to your shareholders instead,” Blumenthal said. 