Inside DOJ’s Wrenching Decision on Whether to Prosecute Boeing
The Justice Department must decide whether to prosecute the aerospace giant over two crashes a half decade ago
By 
Andrew Tangel
Follow
 and 
Dave Michaels
Follow
June 17, 2024 5:30 am ET




194

Gift unlocked article

Listen

(11 min)



A Boeing 737 MAX jet preparing to land. Photo: Elaine Thompson/Associated Press
Glenn Leon sat at one end of a windowless Justice Department conference room two weeks ago prepared for an earful.

The relatives of people who had died in two crashes of Boeing 737 MAX planes crowded around a long table, pleading with the prosecutor over the course of six hours to take a harder line against the company, according to participants. “Don’t let them get away with that murder!” one cried. “Do you want your kids, yourself, your grandkids to be killed on an airplane?” another asked.

The Justice Department last month accused Boeing of violating a pre-existing corporate probation for a fraud conspiracy charge related to the 2018 and 2019 crashes, after a panel of another Boeing plane flew off midflight. Prosecutors now have to decide if they should pursue the charge against Boeing and try to brand the company a felon, which could open the struggling aerospace giant to more financial penalties and complicate its ability to sell defense weapons and space vehicles to the U.S. government.


Glenn Leon Photo: The Wall Street Journal
“We’re going to be very busy in the next several weeks trying to figure out what, if any, other crimes we might be able to charge,” Leon, who runs the fraud section that is investigating Boeing, told the group, according to participants, dozens of whom had also assembled via Webex, from around the globe. Some in the meeting used translators to keep up.

Garland involved
The department is navigating between families seeking extra punishment for Boeing; an American colossus struggling to fix its business and save its reputation; and a judge in Texas who has called the conspiracy case “the deadliest corporate crime in American history.” The case is so sensitive that Attorney General Merrick Garland has personally edited some of the court briefs that prosecutors filed, according to people familiar with the matter. 

Boeing has said it believed it lived up to its commitments under the probation deal. “We continue to engage transparently with the department, as we have throughout the term of the agreement,” the company said.

Under the 2021 deal, Boeing acknowledged its former employees misled air-safety regulators about aspects of the 737 MAX, and agreed to a deferred prosecution agreement, a form of corporate probation, which would have led to the dismissal of the charge had Boeing maintained a blemish-free record. A jury in Texas acquitted the only person charged in the case, a pilot whose role was to persuade regulators to approve less strenuous training for the planes.

Under the terms of the DOJ deal, prosecutors now have until July 7 to decide how to proceed, after the panel blew off the Alaska Airlines flight earlier this year. The department hasn’t accused the company of committing another crime, but said Boeing had violated a provision of its earlier deal that required it to have a compliance program designed to detect and prevent fraud.

Boeing has said it strengthened its approach to safety, engineering and quality since the Lion Air and Ethiopian Airlines crashes in 2018 and 2019. The accidents, which investigators largely blamed on a faulty Boeing flight-control system, thrust the company into turmoil, drew intense government scrutiny, and strained its finances, threatening its long-held reputation for building safe commercial aircraft. Regulators grounded the 737 MAX for nearly two years while Boeing added safeguards.


Catherine Berthet of France holds a photo of her daughter, Camille Geoffroy, who died in a MAX accident, outside the federal court in Fort Worth, Texas. Photo: LM Otero/Associated Press
Increased scrutiny
The DOJ under the Biden administration has applied more scrutiny to deferred prosecution agreements. Two other companies were accused of violating theirs. One of them, Ericsson, paid an additional $206 million and pleaded guilty. 

In cases where a corporate-probation agreement was breached, the department can indict a company, offer a new term of probation or seek a guilty plea. Companies rarely try to litigate the government’s finding of a violation. The settlements give prosecutors unilateral authority to decide if a company lived up to its deal. 

Leon told the families at the meeting that Boeing could face an additional $244 million fine, according to participants. After the families suggested that was inadequate, Leon asked them to calculate how much more they believed should be included to compensate the families for the loss of 346 lives, if Boeing was convicted, according to an email viewed by The Wall Street Journal.

Companies with felony convictions face the prospect of being suspended or barred as defense contractors, but they can seek a waiver from that consequence. “Any action that leads to a felony conviction carries with it the risk of debarment, and that has grotesquely large risks for the government and for Boeing,” said Robert Luskin, a partner at Paul Hastings who has handled many high-profile corporate criminal cases. Boeing’s defense and space unit, which mainly serves the U.S. government, accounted for roughly one-third of the company’s revenue last year.


An Indonesian rescue team lifting a pair of tires from the Lion Air flight that crashed into the Java Sea in 2018. Photo: AZWAR IPANK/AGENCE FRANCE-PRESSE/GETTY IMAGES
An acquittal
The department’s investigation of Boeing began shortly after Lion Air flight 610 crashed into the Java Sea in October 2018, killing all 189 people on board. Some prosecutors wanted to probe whether the company or its executives defrauded investors by denying problems with the 737 MAX’s safety, according to people familiar with the discussions, but supervisors told them to focus on Mark Forkner, a pilot in charge of dealing with certain Federal Aviation Administration officials on training matters.

Forkner was indicted in October 2021 and accused of deceiving the FAA about the new flight-control feature added to the jet. Prosecutors said Forkner’s statements led the FAA to approve lighter pilot-training requirements for the 737 MAX.

U.S. District Judge Reed O’Connor dismissed two of the fraud counts against Forkner a month before his trial, ruling prosecutors tried to use a law that didn’t apply. A jury quickly acquitted Forkner after a four-day trial. 

“Mark should not have been charged,” said David Gerger, a lawyer who represented him at trial. “Fortunately, the court system worked, and the jury declared him not guilty in under two hours.”

Boeing didn’t initially cooperate with the investigation, according to settlement papers. Prosecutors agreed to the 2021 deferred-prosecution agreement, citing Boeing’s later fixes.

Some attorneys in the criminal division wanted to impose an outside consultant to monitor Boeing’s compliance as part of the deal, people familiar with the discussions said.

Boeing wouldn’t agree to a monitor. Senior officials in the Justice Department’s criminal division declined to support one because, they believed, the wrongdoing was limited to Forkner and one other employee, the people said.

Prosecutors believed they had still secured a win for the families, most of whom were overseas: a $500 million compensation fund. Boeing hoped striking the deal would bring finality to the issue, according to people familiar with the matter. But the department had forgotten one important step. 


The inside of a Boeing 737 MAX plane during a United Airlines flight this year. Photo: Bing Guan/Bloomberg News
A second chance
No one told the victims’ families about the settlement before it was announced publicly on Jan. 7, 2021. 

Some of the families were irate that they had been left out of the loop. They believed the deal absolved Boeing’s management, and hired Paul Cassell, a law professor at the University of Utah with experience fighting for crime victims who accepted the case pro bono.

Garland met with them, and the department apologized in a court filing for not conferring with them. But the Justice Department took the position that people who died on the Lion Air flight and the Ethiopian Airlines jet headed to Nairobi, Kenya, weren’t crime victims.

The court last year denied the families’ request to toss Boeing’s deal, but in January, just as Boeing’s probation was about to expire, a fuselage panel blew off an Alaska Airlines flight. The plane: a 737 MAX.

Why Boeing’s Quality Controls and Plane Safety Checks Still Miss Mistakes
You may also like
Why Boeing’s Quality Controls and Plane Safety Checks Still Miss Mistakes
Why Boeing’s Quality Controls and Plane Safety Checks Still Miss Mistakes
Play video: Why Boeing’s Quality Controls and Plane Safety Checks Still Miss Mistakes
Boeing was given 90 days to present regulators with an action plan to address quality-control issues at its 737 factory. Here’s a look at the layers of Boeing’s quality process and the issues each faces. Photo illustration: JJ Lin
That incident triggered a new criminal investigation and sparked fresh worries about a safety culture that Boeing was supposed to have fixed. Four months later, the department said Boeing hadn’t lived up to its obligations under the settlement. This time, the department consulted the families, who came with their own suggestions. 

The families asked about charging ex-Boeing Chief Executive Dennis Muilenburg. Muilenburg misled investors when he defended the safety of the 737 MAX after the first crash and before the second, one of the families’ lawyers told Leon, the fraud section chief.

Boeing paid $200 million to resolve 2022 allegations from the Securities and Exchange Commission that the company and Muilenburg made misleading statements, without admitting or denying wrongdoing. Prosecutors probably couldn’t pursue such a case now given the passage of time and the statute of limitations, Leon told family members in the May meeting. The SEC faces a lower burden of proof to prove its civil charges than criminal prosecutors do, he added.

Muilenburg didn’t respond to requests for comment.

The families also asked about manslaughter, but that too, wouldn’t work, Leon said. The deaths happened outside the U.S., and prosecutors would need to prove that at least one Boeing employee acted with a reckless disregard for human life, Leon said.

SHARE YOUR THOUGHTS
How should the Justice Department approach the Boeing case? Join the conversation below.

“We don’t believe we have the adequate evidence to prove this crime beyond a reasonable doubt,” Leon said.  

The families still want Boeing prosecuted without leniency. That would mean going to trial on the criminal charge that prosecutors deferred in 2021, or allowing Boeing to plead guilty without concessions. 

If not, Boeing will never be forced to fix flaws in its planes, they said in the May 31 meeting.

“There will be a third crash,” Catherine Berthet, whose daughter Camille Geoffroy died in the second MAX accident, told the officials. “You will be responsible.”