Boeing’s Starliner Launches NASA Astronauts After Setbacks
Spacecraft is expected to reach the International Space Station on Thursday and return to Earth next week
By 
Micah Maidenberg
Updated June 5, 2024 2:56 pm ET





Gift unlocked article

Listen

(5 min)


Watch: Boeing Launches Starliner Spacecraft With NASA Astronauts
You may also like
Watch: Boeing Launches Starliner Spacecraft With NASA Astronauts
Boeing launched its crewed Starliner spacecraft to the International Space Station after years of delays. WSJ’s Micah Maidenberg explains the mission and what’s at stake for Boeing. Photo: John Raoux/AP
Boeing’s BA -0.12%decrease; red down pointing triangle Starliner spacecraft blasted off on its first astronaut mission, a years-in-the-making flight that the company and the National Aeronautics and Space Administration had delayed several times. 

The space capsule, carrying astronauts Barry Wilmore and Sunita Williams, was launched Wednesday at 10:52 a.m. ET from Cape Canaveral, Fla. A NASA livestream showed Starliner shooting toward space after the flight began.

“Let’s put some fire in this rocket,” Wilmore said moments before liftoff. The mission proceeded smoothly, with the rocket and Starliner itself hitting milestones following the launch. 

The launch marked a major step forward for a program that had been slowed by repeated technical problems, and exacted a financial toll on Boeing. A successful mission would pave the way for NASA to have a second U.S. option for handling astronaut missions to the International Space Station, with Elon Musk’s SpaceX carrying out crewed flights for the agency since 2020.

About 30 minutes into the flight, Starliner completed a maneuver called an orbital-insertion burn, setting Starliner onto a trajectory to reach the ISS.

Boeing and NASA officials said later at a briefing that Starliner was performing well, though a cooling system used more water than expected during the vehicle’s ascent. That wasn’t posing a problem for the flight, they said. 

Starliner’s next steps include docking with the space station and, as soon as June 14, returning to Earth under parachutes. “There’s a lot of phases to this mission, and we just completed the first one,” Mark Nappi, a Boeing vice president overseeing the Starliner program, said at the briefing. 

Wednesday’s flight is a final test before Boeing’s gumdrop-shaped spacecraft can be certified to begin regularly ferrying NASA crews to and from the ISS.

Starliner’s inaugural crewed mission was previously planned for early May but had been delayed multiple times because of problems that emerged on the vehicle, the United Launch Alliance-built Atlas V booster rocket and a ULA ground system.

First, a problem with a valve on ULA’s rocket prompted a launch delay. ULA replaced that component. Then, engineers spent time studying issues with Starliner itself, including a small and isolated helium leak, before looking to launch this past weekend. 


Starliner stacked on top of a rocket in Florida. Photo: Joe Raedle/Getty Images
About four minutes before Saturday’s planned liftoff, the flight was scrubbed because of a glitch in a ground system that automatically orchestrates several launch functions.

NASA has said ULA traced the problem to a faulty power unit and had replaced equipment, clearing the way for Wednesday’s launch. 

Boeing has been working toward transporting astronauts on Starliner for years. In 2014, NASA hired Boeing and SpaceX to develop vehicles for astronaut missions to and from the space station. 

Newsletter Sign-up

What’s News

Catch up on the headlines, understand the news and make better decisions, free in your inbox daily. Enjoy a free article in every edition.


Preview

Subscribe
For Boeing, which helped propel U.S. space exploration during the Apollo moon missions, successfully completing the crewed mission on Starliner would bring it closer to finally delivering on its obligations to NASA. SpaceX flew its first astronaut mission for the agency four years ago and has been handling those flights for the agency since then.

Boeing has run up against various challenges with Starliner over the years, including problems with software coding and stuck valves. The company has reported $1.4 billion in accounting losses tied to Starliner’s development.

Starliner is set to dock with the ISS on Thursday. Wilmore and Williams, experienced former Naval aviators who have traveled to space before, are slated to stay on the space station for roughly a week. 

In a March interview, Wilmore said it is always better to catch technical issues with spacecraft before launch. “You don’t want to be in space wishing you’re on the ground,” he said. 

SpaceX has flown NASA astronauts on eight operational missions to the space station so far. The agency has another six of those flights booked with the company, the next set for August. 

Should Boeing win NASA certification for Starliner—deeming the vehicle ready for regular flights—the company is under contract with NASA to conduct six more crewed missions to the ISS.