Boeing Locks Out Firefighters at 737 Factory Amid Contract Dispute
Airplane maker and union have been wrestling for months over wages and staffing levels
By 
Sharon Terlep
May 4, 2024 8:08 am ET





Gift unlocked article

Listen

(3 min)



Boeing says that its pay for firefighters is competitive. Photo: M. Scott Brauer/Zuma Press
Boeing BA -0.12%decrease; red down pointing triangle locked out about 130 firefighters who work at its 737 factory and other operations in Washington state following a contract dispute between the jet maker and the firefighters’ union. 

Boeing and the union have been wrestling for months over wages and staffing levels for firefighters who handle medical emergencies and accidents at Boeing facilities. 

The firefighters cover factories that make 737, 767 and 777 jets as well as Boeing facilities in Seattle and Moses Lake. They are also on hand for all test and delivery flights or whenever a jet is fueled. 

The company said it had secured its own firefighters to replace the unionized crew and has a contingency plan in place to ensure operations and production won’t be affected by the lockout. 

Since a Jan. 5 midair blowout, Boeing has been dogged by quality issues that have slowed production and drawn increased regulatory scrutiny.

It is also in separate contract talks with unions representing thousands of mechanics and other employees in Washington.

Newsletter Sign-up

What’s News

Catch up on the headlines, understand the news and make better decisions, free in your inbox daily. Enjoy a free article in every edition.


Preview

Subscribe
Boeing warned the firefighters union that it would lock workers out at 12:01 a.m. Saturday without a deal. The union’s members twice voted down proposed deals, and negotiations earlier in the week failed to bring the sides closer together. 

“We have now locked out members of the bargaining unit and fully implemented our contingency plan,” the company said in a statement shortly after the deadline passed. “Our plan ensures safe operations.”

The International Association of Fire Fighters argues that Boeing pays its members wages well below those of surrounding municipal departments and that it takes too long—19 years, under the company’s proposal—to reach maximum pay. It says the force is short staffed. 

“Our people love Boeing, they love their jobs,” said Casey Yeager, president of the IAFF local representing the firefighters. “But we can’t retain people, because the pay is so low.”

The firefighters last year responded to an average of 225 calls a month. They receive specialized training to deal with chemicals and fuels involved in airplane manufacturing. 

Boeing says pay levels and the time it takes to reach top wages should match that of other corporate firefighting forces, not that of municipal departments. It says staffing levels are higher than those that apply to corporate forces. 

The company says the average firefighter made $91,000 a year, which it says is competitive. The union says that pay starts at $52,000 and tops out at about $85,000, and that Boeing’s figure includes significant overtime. 

“The parties are not close to reaching an agreement,” Michael Gitto, Boeing’s labor relations director, wrote in a letter threatening Yeager with a lockout. “The company has gone as far financially as it is willing to go and will not add any more money to its offer.”