Boeing’s Earnings Showed a Huge Loss. Today’s Workers Vote Is Huge for the Stock.
By 
Al Root
Follow
Updated Oct 23, 2024, 9:59 am EDT / Original Oct 22, 2024, 4:57 pm EDT
The adjusted third-quarter loss was $6.17 billion, or $10.44 per share, on sales of $17.8 billion. Wall Street was looking for a loss of $10.35 a share on sales of $17.8 billion, according to FactSet.

Boeing stock was down 2.8% at $155.37 in early trading on Wednesday, while the S&P 500 and Dow Jones Industrial Average were down 0.3% and 0.6%, respectively.

It’s one of the largest quarterly losses ever recorded by Boeing, but the results were well-telegraphed. Boeing pre-announced some of its third-quarter numbers on Oct. 11, including one-time charges totaling some $5 billion.

“The earnings today are essentially a nonevent after the pre-announcement,” wrote Vertical Research Partners analyst Rob Stallard in a Wednesday note.

One of investors’ main focus Wednesday we’ll be a labor vote that could end a strike that began on Sept. 13, after workers in the Pacific Northwest overwhelmingly voted down a deal that would have raised base pay by 25% over four years.

The new tentative labor contract, announced over the weekend, includes wage increases of 35%, along with other benefit enhancements. By the end of the tentative contract, workers earning the top end of the new pay scale could make roughly $140,000 a year before overtime.

Voting takes place between 8 a.m. and 5 p.m. Pacific time. The results should be known about 9 p.m. Eastern time.

After workers almost unanimously rejected the first tentative deal, nothing about the negotiating process feels certain. Investors are hoping employees vote yes.

So do aerospace suppliers. GE Aerospace reported third-quarter earnings Tuesday morning. The numbers were better than expected, but shipments of LEAP engines, used to power the 737 MAX jet, fell 6% from a year earlier. GE Aerospace CEO Larry Culp played down the strike’s impact on the quarter but said things would get more complicated if the labor stoppage dragged on much longer.

Beyond the strike, Wednesday will be the first chance investors have to hear from new CEO Kelly Ortberg since Boeing announced it would lay off some 17,000 workers to put the company on better financial footing. Aerodynamic Advisory managing director Richard Aboulafia was surprised by the timing of the layoff announcement.

Ortberg said in remarks posted to Boeing’s website, “Clearly, we are at a crossroads: The trust in our company has eroded, we’re saddled with too much debt, we’ve had serious lapses in our performance across the company which have disappointed many of our customers.” Ortberg added that Boeing still has positive things going for it like a backlog amounting to “roughly half-a-trillion dollars”

He is focused on stabilizing the business and improving business execution. “My mission here is pretty straightforward. Turn this big ship in the right direction, and restore Boeing to the leadership position that we all know and want.”

Investors will be looking for a little more detail about Ortberg’s plan and recent actions on a quarterly conference call that begins at 10:30 a.m. Eastern time.

As for the balance sheet, Boeing management has consistently maintained its commitment to keeping Boeing’s investment-grade credit rating. Wall Street believes keeping that rating will require an equity sale. How much stock Boeing might sell, and when, has yet to be determined.

As of the close of trading on Tuesday, Boeing stock was down about 39% so far this year. Shares were down about 36% since an emergency-door plug blew out of a 737 MAX 9 jet while it was in flight on Jan. 5. Shares are also down about 2% since the strike began.