Boeing Tells Airlines to Check 787 Cockpit Seats After Mishap on Latam Flight
Flight attendant hit a seat switch that pushed pilot into controls during flight to New Zealand, industry officials say
By 
Andrew Tangel
 and 
Sharon Terlep
Updated March 15, 2024 4:22 pm ET





Gift unlocked article

Listen

(5 min)


‘Plane Basically Stopped': Moment of Horror on Latam Boeing 787 Flight
You may also like

The sudden drop of a Latam Airlines flight that injured dozens of passengers was likely caused by a cockpit seat mishap, according to U.S. industry officials. Photo: Brett Phibbs/AFP/Getty Images
Boeing BA 3.11%increase; green up pointing triangle advised airlines to check the cockpit seats on 787 Dreamliner jets after a seat mishap likely pushed a pilot into the controls, causing a sudden, terrifying plunge on a flight to New Zealand this week.

A Latam Airlines flight attendant hit a switch on the pilot’s seat while serving a meal, leading a motorized feature to push the pilot into the controls and push down the plane’s nose, according to U.S. industry officials briefed on preliminary evidence from an investigation. The switch, on the back of the chair, is usually covered and isn’t supposed to be used when a pilot is in the seat.


A switch on the back of 787 cockpit seats controls a motor that moves the seat forward or back. Boeing in 2017 provided airlines with instructions for maintaining the switches.

Pilot’s chair

Rocker switch and cover

Loose/detached switch

Closing the cover on a loose switch can jam the switch on, causing unintended seat movement.

Source: the company

Boeing issued a memo late Thursday to operators of 787 jets recommending that they inspect the cockpit chairs for loose covers on the switches and instructing them how to turn off power to the pilot seat motor if needed. Boeing said it is considering updates to flight crew manuals.

“Closing the spring-loaded seat back switch guard onto a loose/detached rocker switch cap can potentially jam the rocker switch, resulting in unintended seat movement,” according to the memo, which was viewed by The Wall Street Journal.

The memo says this was a known issue and that Boeing had issued a related service notice in 2017. The memo doesn’t indicate whether a loose switch cover played a role in the incident on the Latam flight. The part is on roughly 375 planes, according to a person familiar with the situation. 

Boeing, in a statement on Friday, said the latest memo is a precautionary measure and a reminder to operators to follow the earlier bulletin to inspect and maintain the seat switches. Such notices are common as potential issues arise on aircraft once they are in service. The Dreamliner has been in service since 2011 and the one involved in the Latam flight is 8 years old.

About 50 passengers on the flight from Sydney to Auckland required medical attention, and some passengers were pinned to the ceiling as the airplane suddenly descended. Latam, a Chile-based airline, has said the Dreamliner suffered a “technical event during the flight which caused strong movement.”

The investigation into the flight is ongoing and Boeing said it defers to authorities on any findings. “We have taken the precautionary measure of reminding 787 operators of a service bulletin issued in 2017,” Boeing said. “We are recommending operators perform an inspection at the next maintenance opportunity.”

A spokesman for Latam previously said the company was working with authorities on the investigation and declined to comment further until the investigation was finished. Latam’s pilots union declined to comment; the flight-attendant union didn’t respond. Ipeco, the cockpit seat supplier, didn’t respond.


The Latam 787 Dreamliner that suddenly lost altitude sat on the tarmac at Auckland International Airport. Photo: Brett Phibbs/Agence France-Presse/Getty Images
The Federal Aviation Administration said it was monitoring the situation closely and had convened a corrective-action review board to examine Boeing’s response to the Latam incident and its 2017 service bulletin.

The Dreamliner’s cockpit seats are designed to move out of the way to enable pilots to maneuver in the jets’ tightly packed flight decks. Pilots said the motorized seats move slowly. 

“It would be like the seats in your car: If all of a sudden they started moving on their own due to a stuck switch, what would you do?” said John Cox, an aviation safety consultant and pilot. 

Newsletter Sign-up

What’s News

Catch up on the headlines, understand the news and make better decisions, free in your inbox daily. Enjoy a free article in every edition.


Preview

Subscribe
“I have not heard of one like this before,” Cox said. “But if Boeing can demonstrate a failure scenario where the switch does stick, then the seat is going to travel full forward.”

American Airlines issued a notice to 787 captains advising them of the potential hazard. It asked them to instruct the crew not to use the switch while the chair is occupied and said that its maintenance teams would check that the switches are properly secured.

Industry publication the Air Current earlier reported a cockpit seat movement was a focus of the investigation.

Two investigators from Chile’s civil-aviation agency arrived in New Zealand on Wednesday to lead the investigation, which also includes an expert from New Zealand, a spokeswoman for the agency said Thursday. The Latam aircraft that took the sudden plunge returned to Chile during a flight with just crew on board. It is parked at Santiago’s airport, the spokeswoman said.

“It was a horrible experience,” Verónica Martínez, a passenger on the flight, told Chilean media after she returned to Santiago on another aircraft. She said flight attendants as well as passengers who weren’t wearing their seat belts were thrown to the ceiling of the plane. “I saw a baby fly up. It was terrible.”

The 787 Dreamliner is a wide-body aircraft that is often used on long-haul international flights. Boeing has faced scrutiny for manufacturing and safety lapses after a Jan. 5 accident involving a fuselage panel that flew off an Alaska Airlines 737 MAX jet midflight.