‘Everything Hit the Roof’: A Moment of Horror Unfolds on a Latam Boeing 787
Investigation into ‘technical event’ that caused plane to lurch downward could focus on software, experts say
By 
Mike Cherney
Follow
Updated March 12, 2024 11:42 pm ET





Gift unlocked article

Listen

(7 min)


‘Plane Basically Stopped': Moment of Horror on Latam Boeing 787 Flight
You may also like
‘Plane Basically Stopped': Moment of Horror on Latam Boeing 787 Flight
Dozens of passengers were injured on a flight from Sydney to New Zealand when a Boeing 787 Dreamliner suddenly dropped. Photo: Brett Phibbs/AFP/Getty Images
SYDNEY—Brian Jokat was asleep, buckled into a window seat on a three-hour Latam Airlines flight to New Zealand when the plane suddenly dropped, jolting him awake. He looked up and saw a man to his right pinned to the roof, and several other people seemingly flying around.

“You know in ‘The Exorcist,’ when the girl flies from the bed and hits the ceiling? It’s exactly that scene,” he said. “I was like, what the heck is this?”

What caused the midair incident that led to around 50 people on board the flight from Sydney to Auckland requiring medical treatment is now the focus of an investigation involving air-accident teams from Chile and New Zealand.

Chile-based Latam said the plane, a Boeing 787 Dreamliner, suffered a “technical event during the flight which caused strong movement.” It didn’t give specifics. 

Jokat, a 61-year-old Canadian, said there was no rumbling like he would have expected with turbulence. After the incident, he said, one of the pilots came to the cabin and said his instrument panel had gone black for a second or two, before lighting back up again. “He said, ‘For that split second, there was nothing I could do,’” according to Jokat.

In a statement, Boeing said it was thinking of the passengers and the crew onboard the flight.

“We commend everyone involved in the response effort,” Boeing said. “We are in contact with our customer, and Boeing stands ready to support investigation-related activities as requested.”


The ceiling of the Boeing plane that suffered an incident Monday was damaged. Photo: brian adam jokat/Reuters
Air-safety investigators are likely to focus on the aircraft’s software and power issues, some aviation experts said. Because the incident occurred in international airspace, Chile’s accident investigation authority is taking the lead. New Zealand authorities are assisting and have said they are gathering evidence including seizing the cockpit voice and flight-data recorders.

The incident could be another headache for Boeing. The company’s reputation has already suffered from a pair of fatal 737 MAX 8 crashes in 2018 and 2019, and it has been dogged more recently by issues with various models, including misdrilled holes, loose rudder bolts and the Jan. 5 Alaska Airlines MAX 9 door-plug blowout.

Lucas Ellwood was using his iPad and fellow passengers were finishing up lunch when the plane lurched downward.

Around him, people were thrown upward and suspended on the ceiling. Panels on the roof were busted open. Ellwood, who was strapped in with his seat belt, saw his iPad hit the ceiling and hold there for a split second.

A moment later, everything—and everyone—fell down.

Latam said 10 passengers and three cabin crew members were taken to medical facilities after the flight landed in Auckland, New Zealand’s biggest city, on Monday afternoon, but none of the injuries were life-threatening. An ambulance service said one person was in serious condition.

People suffered head wounds and needed neck braces, with roughly an hour to go in the flight, Ellwood said. Passengers were moaning and screaming. Ellwood offered his belt to help with first aid, and later saw it strapped to the chest and arms of a man with a bandaged and bloodied head. His iPad fell in the aisle, his power bank two seats ahead of him.


A passenger aboard the Latam flight shows his injuries. Photo: brian adam jokat/Reuters
“Everything that was just not held down hit the roof,” said Ellwood, a 35-year-old DJ who lives in New Zealand. “We suffered essentially like an earthquake in the plane. It shook downwards like there was a cavity beneath you, and it just took you down.”

Turbulence can cause similar injuries and events, and meteorologists expect that climate change’s impact on the jet stream can make a certain type of severe turbulence more likely.

Severe turbulence injuries are rare. Between 2009 and 2022, 163 people were seriously injured during turbulence, according to National Transportation Safety Board data. Flight attendants, who are likelier to be standing during flights, are most likely to get injured, the data shows. Nearly all passengers who were injured weren’t wearing a belt, NTSB researchers have said.

Some experts said that instruments going black and the airline calling it a technical event suggest that turbulence may not be the main factor leading to the Latam flight suddenly dropping.

“Normally, that sort of situation where we’ve got people not restrained in the cabin, usually arises from a turbulence event,” said Keith Tonkin, a former Australian air force pilot and Qantas commercial pilot who is now managing director at Aviation Projects, a consulting firm. “But this is very clearly being described as technical, so that’s a bit unusual.”

Richard de Crespigny, another former Qantas pilot, said if it’s true that screens went black, then that could indicate there’s been a power problem. De Crespigny, who was credited with safely landing a Qantas flight when an engine exploded midair in 2010, cautioned the true cause of the Latam flight incident won’t be known until investigators have a chance to do their job.

“Primarily, they are going to just study the minutes leading up to the event, and particularly what happened during the bunt, as to why it appears the flight control surfaces moved to make the aircraft bunt down,” he said. “Until I see the facts, I’m not going to say this is Boeing’s fault.”

The incident is a reminder that passengers should keep their seat belts fastened when in their seats, pilots said. Despite Monday’s incident, flying remains very safe—last year was the safest year for flying by several measures, according to the International Air Transport Association. There were no fatal accidents involving passenger jet aircraft last year, though there was a fatal crash involving a turboprop.

For passengers on the Latam flight, there was little time to think rationally. Jokat, the Canadian passenger, said he thought it was all over when the nose of the plane went down. But in a split second, the aircraft flattened out again.

“People were in shock, and they were shaking,” he said. “There was a whole upheaval of just people screaming and freaking out.”


Latam check-in counters at Auckland airport. The carrier didn’t give specifics on the ‘technical event’ that caused Monday’s incident. Photo: brett phibbs/Agence France-Presse/Getty Images
Write to Mike Cherney at mike.cherney@wsj.com

Corrections & Amplifications
“Primarily, they are going to just study the minutes leading up to the event, and particularly what happened during the bunt, as to why it appears the flight control surfaces moved to make the aircraft bunt down,” he said. An earlier version of this article incorrectly quoted Richard de Crespigny as saying flight control services. (Corrected on March 12)