Boeing Investors Can’t See a Thing
The plane maker’s more cautious approach is welcome, but it also leaves markets with few tangible reasons to back the company
By 
Jon Sindreu
Jan. 31, 2024 12:26 pm ET




57

Gift unlocked article

Listen

(5 min)



Air-safety regulators have told Boeing to freeze production of the 737 family of aircraft at its current monthly rate. PHOTO: Jason Redmond / AFP
The impact on Boeing’s reputation of a 737 MAX 9 door plug blowing out midflight is clear, but Wall Street is still scrambling to guess its financial magnitude. Investors should act in a way that the U.S. plane manufacturer has recently failed to do: While in a storm, err on the side of caution.

On Wednesday, the Virginia-based plane maker published its first earnings since the Jan. 5 accident during an Alaska Airlines flight. Its shares rose more than 5%, because Boeing BA -1.14%decrease; red down pointing triangle lost less money during the final quarter of last year than median analyst forecasts were suggesting. Free cash flow for 2023 overall came in near the high end of the range executives had announced.

What markets wanted to know most of all, however, was the extent to which the incident might throw the company’s financial recovery off course. Boeing promised steady cash flow and progress with the problems at its defense arm in 2024, but declined to give explicit guidance.

“We won’t get ahead of our regulator,” Boeing Chief Executive Officer David Calhoun told analysts Wednesday, striking a very different tone to that of former CEO Dennis Muilenburg after the accidents that grounded the MAX in 2019 and 2020. “We caused the problem, and we understand that.”

Officials are still investigating the blowout. So far, it seems likely that the problem was caused by factory workers failing to properly secure the plug, rather than a broader design issue. The MAX 9 is flying again, and Boeing is delivering it to airline customers.

SHARE YOUR THOUGHTS
What’s your biggest takeaway from Boeing’s fourth-quarter results? Join the conversation below.

Nevertheless, there seem to have been quality-control lapses in several aircraft flown by Alaska and United Airlines. Following an order from U.S. regulators last week, production rates of the 737 family will remain frozen at 38 a month until controls are assessed. Investors’ financial expectations had been based on the plane maker’s plans to ramp output up to 50 by next year.

Two 737 variants that Boeing is still trying to get certified, the smaller MAX 7 and, at the other end of the spectrum, the elongated MAX 10, were supposed to feature in the production increase. Extra scrutiny seems set to create further delays. Boeing confirmed Tuesday that it is withdrawing its request that the MAX 7 be exempted from safety standards related to its deicing system, which would have allowed the model to fly while a solution was still being designed.

This seems to be part of Calhoun’s commitment to treading more cautiously, which includes adding additional quality checks to the manufacturing process and giving airline operators access to the factory. In an unprecedented move, 737 production was paused for an entire day last week, he revealed.

Boeing stock has fallen about 14% since Jan. 5, though this has simply returned it to November levels.

Meanwhile, brokers have cut their forecasts for Boeing’s narrow-body deliveries in 2024 by only 2%, data by Visible Alpha show. They seem to think that Boeing will be able to shift some resources left idle by lower production of the existing MAX variants to the coming MAX 10. They also project that 2024 losses will mostly be offset by higher production rates in 2025 and 2026, especially when it comes to the MAX 7.

Markets have solid reasons not to embrace doomsday scenarios. Boeing’s order backlog is now above 5,600 commercial aircraft. Supply constraints and the advantages of fleet commonality mean that carriers can’t simply switch over to its competitor Airbus. And Calhoun’s stop-and-start approach is the right one to eventually restore confidence.

Yet it may come with more financial trade-offs than investors seem to be assuming. On top of the extra costs associated with stricter quality control, greater caution might mean casting further doubt on customers’ schedules, which will create backlash. Last week, United CEO Scott Kirby said he will study an alternative plan that doesn’t include the MAX 10s that he has on order. 

This variant still features in analysts’ forecasts for this year, but it is quite plausible that it won’t fly until well into 2025. MAX 7 deliveries now seem likely to slide into 2026. Longer term, devoting so much effort to fixing quality could also draw Boeing away from designing new products.

When there is no visibility, landing the plane is a good idea. But that also means it isn’t going anywhere.