Boeing Says It Can’t Set 2024 Financial Goals Amid 737 MAX Woes
Company needs to ‘focus on every next airplane’ in wake of Alaska Airlines blowout, CEO says
By 
Sharon Terlep
Updated Jan. 31, 2024 11:18 am ET




93

Gift unlocked article

Listen

(4 min)



Boeing reported quarterly results that were slightly better than expectations. Photo: Paul Christian Gordon/Zuma Press
Boeing BA -0.94%decrease; red down pointing triangle is bracing for a financial blow from the Alaska Airlines door-plug blowout. The jet maker just doesn’t know how big it will be. 

The American manufacturing giant didn’t provide financial targets for 2024 as it reported quarterly results on Wednesday that were slightly better than expectations. It generated $3 billion of cash flow on $22 billion of fourth-quarter revenue. 

“While we often use this time of year to share or update our financial and operational objectives, now is not the time for that,” CEO Dave Calhoun said in a message to employees. “We will simply focus on every next airplane.”

Prior to the incident Boeing had set a goal of generating $10 billion of annual free cash flow by 2025 or 2026. On a Wednesday conference call, finance chief Brian West said Boeing would stick with that target, but expects to hit its goals later within that timeframe than it initially expected.

Boeing shares, which have slumped this month, were up 5% in afternoon trading.

Investors are worried that added regulatory scrutiny and Boeing’s efforts to improve its manufacturing process could slow deliveries and weaken cash flow. Some airlines that rely on Boeing’s jets have already warned of the impact on their businesses.

Can Boeing Repair the $12 Billion Hole in Its Reputation?
You may also like
Can Boeing Repair the $12 Billion Hole in Its Reputation?
Can Boeing Repair the $12 Billion Hole in Its Reputation?
Play video: Can Boeing Repair the $12 Billion Hole in Its Reputation?
The FAA has grounded some Boeing 737 Max 9 planes after a door plug fell from an Alaska Airlines flight. Now, other airlines are reporting “loose bolts” in their Boeing aircraft. WSJ’s George Downs explores what the accident means for Boeing and whether the company can afford another setback. Photo composite: NTSB/George Downs
Boeing said it continues to deliver 737 airplanes and its production rate is now at 38 a month. It said it is also producing about five of its 787 Dreamliners a month.

U.S. air-safety regulators last week put limits on Boeing’s production of 737 MAX jets, weeks after a door plug ripped away from a MAX 9 shortly after it took off, leaving a hole the size of an emergency exit in its side. 

Boeing and other industry officials increasingly believe the plane maker’s employees failed to put back bolts needed to secure the door plug during production, The Wall Street Journal reported. 

“We’ve taken significant steps over the last several years to strengthen our safety and quality processes, but this accident makes it absolutely clear that we have more work to do,” Calhoun said. 

SHARE YOUR THOUGHTS
What will it take for Boeing to restore its reputation for safety and quality? Join the conversation below.

The Federal Aviation Administration said its production limits affect Boeing’s 737 MAX, not other commercial aircraft it makes. The agency said it would freeze MAX production rates at current levels. The company had been planning to increase production of its 737 jets to 50 a month, a goal the company had expected to hit next year.

The National Transportation Safety Board, which is leading the U.S. government’s main probe of the blowout, is still investigating what caused it and might not issue its conclusions for months.

The incident also threatens Boeing’s ability to launch two new MAX variants, the shorter MAX 7 and slightly longer MAX 10. The company had been expecting certification of the planes, both of which are already delayed, as soon as this year. 

Fallout from the incident overshadowed a solid end to 2023, in which the company bested its own forecasts and succeeded in ramping up production from earlier in the year. The company delivered 157 commercial aircraft in the fourth quarter.

Boeing booked a net loss of $30 million in the quarter ended Dec. 31, less than the $663 million loss a year ago. Analysts polled by FactSet expected a $140 million loss. 

The company reported $3 billion of free cash flow from its operations for the quarter. Boeing generated $4.4 billion of free cash flow for the year, hitting its targeted range of $3 billion to $5 billion.