David Calhoun Was Brought In to Fix Boeing. Now He Has to Defend It.
Boeing CEO is under criticism from airline executives and Congress over the 737 MAX 9 plane whose door plug fell off at 16,000 feet
By 
Sharon Terlep
 and 
Alison Sider
Jan. 28, 2024 10:00 am ET





Gift unlocked article

Listen

(9 min)



David Calhoun, shown last year, was named CEO of Boeing following a pair of fatal 737 MAX crashes. Photo: DAVID RYDER/REUTERS
David Calhoun was standing in a lecture hall filled with worried factory workers and their white-collar colleagues.  

Days earlier, a piece of a Boeing BA -1.05%decrease; red down pointing triangle jet blew off in midair with the plane full of passengers.

One worker asked the 66-year-old executive what lessons they could learn from another crisis at the American manufacturing giant. 

“We just have to always remind ourselves that our people on the ground…that ear…our ear for them…our willingness to seek, is maybe the most important thing we can do on this journey,” Calhoun said, according to a recording of the meeting. “I’ve learned my own lessons across Boeing broadly speaking, you just can’t work hard enough as a leader to lend that ear.” 

The Boeing boss is getting an earful. Airline leaders are venting publicly. Investors are fleeing the stock. Congress is threatening hearings. The incident became the butt of a “Saturday Night Live” skit.

Calhoun—enlisted to fix Boeing following a pair of fatal 737 MAX crashes in 2018 and 2019—is taking heat after the accident on the Jan. 5 Alaska Airlines flight left a gaping hole in the plane at 16,000 feet.

Instead of touting a turnaround, Calhoun has spent the past couple of weeks shuttling across the country, fielding questions from regulators and politicians, meeting with his directors and walking the factory floors where the MAX 9 jet and its fuselage were assembled. His talk with workers was at the Wichita, Kan., supplier that made the fuselage and door plug that blew off midflight. 

“Boeing needs to get their act together,” American Airlines Chief Executive Officer Robert Isom said Thursday. “The issues that they’ve been dealing with over the recent period of time, but also going back a number of years now, is unacceptable.” 


A photo released by the National Transportation Safety Board shows the section of the Alaska Airlines plane that lost its door plug in midair. Photo: NTSB/Associated Press
On Wednesday, Calhoun plans to be in Renton, Wash., where Boeing builds 737s, to announce the company’s latest quarterly results and face questions from analysts trying to assess the financial damage. Boeing shares have fallen around 17% since the Alaska accident.

“We fly safe planes,” Calhoun told reporters who flanked him on Capitol Hill last week between meetings with lawmakers. “We don’t put planes in the air that we don’t have 100% confidence in.”

“Were you 100% confident in the plane that fell apart in the sky?” a reporter later asked among a throng of media, as a Boeing staffer ushered Calhoun away. The CEO didn’t respond. 

The company has said it will cooperate with regulators as it takes steps to improve safety and quality. 

Known for a style that focuses on holding senior leaders accountable for their approaches, Calhoun is confronted with the reality that the door-plug blowout wasn’t an isolated incident. Boeing and its supply chain have been beset by snafus—from misdrilled holes on 737 fuselages and production slip-ups on the 787 Dreamliner to mishaps with the new Air Force One—which have disrupted production at several factories. None of those issues resulted in an in-flight incident. 

In the days following the Jan. 5 accident, airlines discovered loose hardware on additional MAX 9 jets. Then the Federal Aviation Administration reviewed data from 40 inspections of grounded planes and deemed Boeing’s quality-assurance issues unacceptable. The agency imposed limits on MAX production.

“It tears my heart out, the memes and the way it’s characterized in the press,” a former senior Boeing executive said. “It is inexcusable. They’ve got to get to the bottom of what happened, but more important than that, why.”

Wall Street is questioning if added regulatory scrutiny means Boeing will fall short of its long-stated production and cash-flow goals for next year and beyond. The company hasn’t yet given financial guidance for 2024, but prior to the incident said that it aims to hit $10 billion of free cash flow by 2025 or 2026.

“You will have stakeholders questioning leadership,” said Ron Epstein, an aerospace analyst at Bank of America. “You look at how the initial MAX crash happened and where we are today, and you keep coming back to this one thing: culture.”