FAA Puts Limits on Boeing 737 Output, Clears Path for Grounded Jets to Fly
Agency says Boeing cannot boost production; Alaska Airlines and United Airlines can check their grounded jets
By 
Alison Sider
Follow
 and 
Andrew Tangel
Follow
Updated Jan. 25, 2024 12:20 am ET





Gift unlocked article

Listen

(6 min)


You may also like

Tap For Sound
The FAA has grounded some Boeing 737 Max 9 planes. WSJ’s George Downs explores whether the company can afford another setback. Photo composite: NTSB/George Downs
U.S. air-safety regulators on Wednesday put limits on Boeing’s BA -1.07%decrease; red down pointing triangle production of 737 MAX jets, but cleared the way for grounded jets to resume flying after airlines complete inspections.

Most of Boeing’s MAX 9 jets were grounded on Jan. 6, a day after a near-catastrophe on an Alaska Airlines ALK 3.47%increase; green up pointing triangle flight. A door plug ripped away from the plane shortly after it took off, leaving a gaping hole the size of an emergency exit in its side. 

“We will not agree to any request from Boeing for an expansion in production or approve additional production lines for the 737 MAX until we are satisfied that the quality control issues uncovered during this process are resolved,” said FAA Administrator Mike Whitaker.

The FAA said its production limits affected Boeing’s 737 MAX, not other commercial aircraft it makes. The agency said it would freeze MAX production rates at current levels. Boeing has been producing about 30 of the jets a month at its Renton, Wash., factory.

The National Transportation Safety Board, which is leading the U.S. government’s main probe of the blowout, is still investigating what caused it and might not issue its conclusions for months.

Before they are allowed to fly again, the FAA said, MAX 9 jets will go through a more rigorous maintenance process that includes inspection of specific bolts, guide tracks and fittings and detailed visual inspection of both door plugs. Carriers will also need to tighten fasteners and fix any problems they find. 

Whitaker said the “exhaustive, enhanced” review, which included scrutiny from a board of safety experts, has given the FAA confidence to allow the work to go forward. 

“However, let me be clear: This won’t be back to business as usual for Boeing,” he said. 


An Alaska Airlines Boeing 737 Max 9 aircraft awaiting inspection at Seattle-Tacoma International Airport earlier this month. Photo: Lindsey Wasson/Associated Press
The grounding has disrupted operations for Alaska and United Airlines UAL 3.87%increase; green up pointing triangle, two of the largest operators of the MAX 9, and top executives at both airlines voiced criticism of Boeing this week. United said the MAX 9 accounts for about 8% of its capacity and said the grounding would likely contribute to a wider-than-anticipated first-quarter loss. 

United said it is preparing to return MAX 9 planes to scheduled service on Sunday. Alaska said it expected its first planes to resume flying on Friday, after inspections expected to take up to 12 hours for each plane.

Boeing has been planning to add another 737 production line in Everett, Wash., north of Seattle. The line, slated to open in the second half of the year, is central to Boeing’s efforts to fill a backlog of orders from airlines clamoring for planes. It needs a fourth line to meet its goal of producing 50 737s a month, a goal the company planned to hit next year. 

Also at stake: Boeing’s ability to launch two new MAX variants, the shorter MAX 7 and slightly longer MAX 10. The company had been expecting certification of the planes, both of which are already delayed, as soon as this year. 

Boeing said it would cooperate with the FAA and work on improving safety and quality.

United said it is now taking the MAX 10 out of its internal plans. “It’s a great aircraft. But we can’t count on it,” Chief Financial Officer Michael Leskinen said during United’s earnings call on Tuesday. 

Boeing has a backlog of more than 4,300 undelivered 737s. 

The door plug and how it attaches to the plane’s fuselage has been a primary focus for investigators. Airlines have discovered loose hardware on some MAX 9 jets, and air safety officials are probing Boeing’s manufacturing practices. 

During production, Boeing workers removed and then reinstalled the door plug that later blew off, according to people familiar with the matter. It couldn’t immediately be determined why Boeing removed the door plug. The Seattle Times earlier reported Boeing’s role in reinstalling the door plug.


Boeing CEO Dave Calhoun leaving a meeting with lawmakers in Washington, D.C., on Wednesday. Photo: J. Scott Applewhite/Associated Press
Whitaker told The Wall Street Journal earlier this month that all indications pointed to a manufacturing lapse, not a design flaw, that led to the Alaska accident.

Jennifer Homendy, the NTSB’s chair, has said the board will look into the door plug’s production, transport, installation, and entry into service, as well as quality checks along the way. NTSB officials have said the safety board will seek to determine whether bolts that are supposed to hold the plug door were in fact there. An investigator is expected to return this week to Boeing’s 737 factory in Renton. 

Boeing, which has been dogged by quality issues, has said it is cooperating with the government investigations. Executives have said they regret the impact to Boeing customers and that they would help airlines address any findings from inspections. Boeing Chief Executive David Calhoun met with lawmakers on Capitol Hill on Wednesday. 

Sen. Maria Cantwell (D., Wash.), who chairs the Senate Commerce Committee, said in a statement following their meeting that she plans to hold hearings to investigate the root cause of Boeing’s safety lapses. A spokeswoman said Cantwell plans to call Calhoun to testify. 

The production limits announced Wednesday aren’t the first time the FAA has tightened oversight of Boeing’s manufacturing. After two smaller 737 MAX jets crashed in 2018 and 2019, the FAA revoked Boeing’s ability to perform routine final safety signoffs for newly minted jets on regulators’ behalf. The accidents took 346 lives. 

Many of the undelivered 737 jets are destined for China, one of Boeing’s biggest markets. Boeing on Wednesday made its first delivery of the MAX jets to China after more than four years. The deliveries have been frozen by Beijing since the two crashes of the 737 MAX.

On Wednesday, a China Southern Airlines 737 MAX 8 jet left the Boeing Field in Seattle, according to Flightradar24, a flight-tracking service.