Boeing, Union Reach Wage Deal to End Strike
Jet maker’s new proposal offers 35% raises in tentative agreement to end machinists‘ strike
By 
Sharon Terlep
Updated Oct. 19, 2024 1:47 pm ET




333

Gift unlocked article

Listen

(4 min)



Striking Boeing workers earlier this month in Renton, Wash. Photo: Chet Strange for WSJ
Boeing BA -0.12%decrease; red down pointing triangle and the leaders of its machinists union have reached a tentative deal that could end a damaging strike that has halted most of its production.

The company is offering a 35% wage increase over four years in its latest proposal. That is up from its original offer of 25% that was overwhelmingly rejected by a union local representing machinists in the Pacific Northwest who build most of Boeing’s jets.

The strike, which began on Sept. 13, has halted production of most of the company’s airplanes and triggered a large round of layoffs.

The union announced the deal Saturday morning, saying, “it warrants presenting to the members and is worthy of your consideration.”

The union plans to vote on the deal on Wednesday. Nearly 95% of workers voted to reject the last tentative deal, which the union’s leaders recommended.

Boeing’s business has been hobbled by the strike, with the company losing an estimated $1 billion a month. CEO Kelly Ortberg announced plans to cut 17,000 jobs and sell up to $25 billion in stock or debt to plug a cash drain. The company has warned of a $6 billion quarterly loss.


Workers moving an airplane at Boeing’s Renton, Wash., facility. Photo: Chet Strange for WSJ
Ortberg has been trying to avert a prolonged shutdown that would not only drain Boeing’s finances but also squeeze key suppliers and result in supplier cutbacks that would slow the company’s ability to resume production levels.

The factories have been idle for more than a month, which has started to ripple through Boeing’s sprawling network of suppliers. On Friday, Spirit AeroSystems said it would furlough 700 workers. Boeing has agreed to buy Spirit, a troubled supplier of fuselages.

The union’s 33,000 members assemble the company’s bestselling 737 jets in factories in the Seattle area. Their wages, which average about $75,000, haven’t kept up with the cost of living in the area. 

Boeing employee Garrett Dress, 20, hired last July, said he opposed the original deal because workers needed a bigger pay bump to maintain a basic quality of life in the expensive Pacific Northwest.

“Where we’re coming up short with the contract, I know that people need that more than ever,” he said recently as he walked a picket line outside Boeing’s 737 factory in Renton, Wash.

The latest offer doesn’t restore pensions, which was a key demand of many members, but something union leaders had said might be out of reach. Boeing would increase company 401(k) contributions, including a one-time payment of $5,000 to all workers’ retirement accounts.

The company also would keep paying annual bonuses, which would have been eliminated as part of the initial offer, and pay $7,000 ratification bonuses. Another union win: Boeing agreed to drop a provision that would have cracked down on employees’ calling in to work, which was a big sticking point for many workers.

More than 50% of members would have to vote to approve the new proposal. Restarting the idled production lines could take weeks from when machinists return to work. 

The company said it looks forward to Wednesday’s vote. The two sides reached the agreement after Acting Labor Secretary Julie Su intervened this week. 

Before the strike, Boeing’s output was well below its goals as the company slowed its factories to address quality issues that surfaced in the wake of a door-plug panel falling off a 737 MAX midflight. It has also struggled to hire and train enough workers after the pandemic.