FAA Says It Will Ramp Up Inspections of Boeing Facilities
Agency plans to audit Boeing 737 MAX 9 production line and suppliers
By 
Andrew Tangel
Updated Jan. 12, 2024 1:47 pm ET





Gift unlocked article

Listen

(3 min)



A 737 MAX aircraft at the Boeing factory in Renton, Wash., in 2019. Photo: Lindsey Wasson/REUTERS
Federal air-safety regulators said Friday that they would ramp up inspections of Boeing’s BA -0.94%decrease; red down pointing triangle manufacturing facilities after grounding roughly 170 Boeing jets in the wake of an emergency landing last week.

The Federal Aviation Administration, which has said it was investigating the aircraft maker after the Jan. 5 accident involving the Alaska Airlines jet, said it would conduct an audit of the 737 MAX 9 production line and its suppliers.

“It is time to re-examine the delegation of authority and assess any associated safety risks,” FAA Administrator Mike Whitaker said.

Boeing has said it is cooperating with investigators and would work to ensure all aircraft meet safety requirements before they return to service. 

The FAA, which certifies each Boeing plane that leaves its factory, has also been under scrutiny over the incident. Congressional leaders have questioned the FAA and Boeing about manufacturing lapses related to the Alaska blowout. 

The FAA said it would also assess safety risks related to what it delegates to Boeing in the oversight of manufacturing quality.

Federal investigators are trying to figure out what caused an emergency-door plug to detach from the Alaska Airlines jet at 16,000 feet, leaving the MAX 9 flying with a gaping hole.

The investigations, by the National Transportation Safety Board and FAA, have focused their initial efforts on the door plug itself and the bolts and other components that attach it to the fuselage. Alaska Airlines and United Airlines say they have found loose hardware on other MAX 9 jets they have checked, suggesting that problems go beyond one plane. 

The FAA previously increased oversight of Boeing’s manufacturing in the wake of two crashes of Boeing 737 MAX 8 jets in 2018 and 2019. After those accidents, the agency revoked the ability of Boeing to have its own employees issue final safety checks, known as airworthiness certificates, for newly produced 737s.

Separately, a group of passengers on the Alaska flight filed a lawsuit in Seattle Thursday against Boeing, alleging the company failed to safely build the aircraft. They are seeking class-action status and damages from Boeing for canceled travel plans, associated health treatments and lost personal items. Boeing declined to comment Friday.