Boeing Is Back in the Spotlight—This Time Over a MAX 9
After latest incident, Boeing executives race to reassure airlines as FAA grounds 171 MAX 9 jets
By 
Sharon Terlep
Follow
Updated Jan. 7, 2024 8:58 pm ET





Gift unlocked article

Listen

(8 min)



A 737 MAX at Boeing’s factory in Renton, Wash. The line of jets has encountered past troubles. Photo: Lindsey Wasson/Reuters
The last thing Boeing BA -1.87%decrease; red down pointing triangle needed was more trouble with its 737 MAX jet. That is exactly what it got to start the new year.

The company had just started to regain its footing after years of tumult around the popular but troubled line of narrow-body jets when a MAX 9 operated by Alaska Airlines had a structural failure Friday night.

A panel that plugs an emergency door ripped away at 16,000 feet leaving a gaping hole in a cabin full of passengers. The Federal Aviation Administration responded Saturday by ordering airlines to ground about 171 of the MAX 9 planes and to conduct inspections. The checks take about four hours and, if cleared, planes can return to service. 

Jennifer Homendy, chair of the National Transportation Safety Board, said Saturday that its investigation is focused on the Alaska Airlines incident and isn’t looking more broadly at Boeing’s 737 MAX.

Newsletter Sign-up

What’s News

Catch up on the headlines, understand the news and make better decisions, free in your inbox daily. Enjoy a free article in every edition.


Preview

Subscribe
Other airlines that install extra seats on MAX 9 jets would have an actual emergency-exit door placed in the location of the plug that broke off. An identical door panel on the opposite side of the Alaska plane remained intact, Homendy said.

No one was seated in the two seats next to the door plug that blew out. “We are very, very fortunate here that this didn’t end up in something more tragic,” Homendy said. 

Boeing said it agrees with the FAA’s decision and would cooperate with investigations into the incident. “Safety is our top priority and we deeply regret the impact this event has had on our customers and their passengers,” the company said. 

Mike Fleming, the Boeing executive in charge of the 737’s return to service, headed to Alaska Airlines’ headquarters Friday night, people familiar with the matter said, and has been working with the FAA and airlines to determine the scope of the issue and the best remedy.

Meanwhile, senior executives were working to reassure airlines, these people said. Boeing’s commercial chief, Stan Deal, has been speaking to the leaders of Alaska and United, two major users of the MAX 9.

Past problems
The U.S. manufacturing giant was trying to shake loose from financial and reputational damage caused when a smaller 737 variant, the MAX 8, was involved in two crashes in 2018 and 2019 that killed 346 people and forced a global grounding of the planes for nearly two years. 

Boeing
S&P 500 Index
Feb. 2023
Dec.
-20
-10
0
10
20
30
40
%
The crisis forced a reckoning for Boeing, which fired Chief Executive Dennis Muilenburg and agreed to a $2.5 billion settlement with the Justice Department. The company, as part of the deal, admitted its employees deceived aviation regulators about safety issues related to the crashes. 

Boeing shares had rebounded in 2023, climbing more than 30%, and CEO David Calhoun was telling investors, customers and regulators that the company is cleaning up its operations. Industry watchers were waiting for Chinese authorities to welcome back the 737. China’s airlines haven’t taken deliveries of new MAX planes. 

Boeing was cleared in 2020 by the FAA to resume deliveries and has been trying to ramp up output to meet demand from airlines that have been waiting for the company’s bestselling plane. Yet Boeing has been beset by regulatory setbacks, production delays and manufacturing glitches. 

In 2021, an electrical problem grounded more than 100 MAX jets for several days.

In a memo to employees on Sunday, Calhoun said he and senior executives will gather in Renton, Wash., on Tuesday to hold a companywide webcast to address safety.

“While we’ve made progress in strengthening our safety management and quality control systems and processes in the last few years, situations like this are a reminder that we must remain focused on continuing to improve every day,” he wrote.

Boeing canceled a planned executive retreat as it raced to determine the cause of Friday’s incident and lay out steps to return the grounded airplanes to flight.

FAA Grounds Dozens of Boeing 737 MAX Jets After Emergency Landing
You may also like
FAA Grounds Dozens of Boeing 737 MAX Jets After Emergency Landing
FAA Grounds Dozens of Boeing 737 MAX Jets After Emergency Landing
Play video: FAA Grounds Dozens of Boeing 737 MAX Jets After Emergency Landing
A Boeing 737 MAX 9 flight operated by Alaska Airlines made an emergency landing in Portland, Ore., after a section of the aircraft ripped away in midair on Friday. Photo: Kyle Rinker/Reuters
Recent snafus
Boeing has been under pressure to increase production of the MAX after deliveries of the model in September fell to their lowest level in more than two years, leaving airlines in a lurch as they worked to meet growing demand for postpandemic travel.

737 production was all but halted in the summer of 2023 because of a snafu involving mis-drilled holes on fuselages. Production accelerated in November and then, in December, Boeing asked operators of newer 737 Max’s to inspect the planes for potential loose bolts in the rudder system. 

“Production issues happen all the time, but they are magnified here given the history of the MAX grounding,” said Jefferies’ aerospace analyst Sheila Kahyaoglu. 

Now Boeing will face fresh investigations by officials in the U.S. and abroad. The FAA and the National Transportation Safety Board said they were opening probes into the Alaska Airlines flight that made the emergency landing in Portland, Ore. 

Friday’s incident will also put new scrutiny on a troubled supplier. Fuselage maker Spirit AeroSystems SPR 0.46%increase; green up pointing triangle is responsible for installing the emergency-door configuration involved in Friday’s incident. Spirit AeroSystems was working with Boeing on Saturday to determine what went wrong. 

Spirit AeroSystems was also responsible for the misdrilled holes on the fuselages that disrupted production in 2023. The company changed CEOs in October, hiring Patrick Shanahan, a 30-year Boeing veteran. 


An image from a video shows passengers near the hole on an Alaska Airlines Boeing 737 MAX 9, which was forced to return to Portland, Ore., on Friday. Photo: Elizabeth Le/Associated Press
MAX variants
The 737, first launched in 1967, is a workhorse for many airlines and has a slew of variants, with the MAX series launched in 2011. New engines helped the MAX cut down on fuel use, and Boeing offered an array of planes with varying capacities and ranges.

The MAX 9, the version in Friday’s incident, is slightly longer and bigger than the MAX 8. The MAX 9 comprised a smaller share of the global airline fleet than the MAX 8, but was a big seller last year. The plane accounted for roughly 20% of Boeing’s 2023 MAX deliveries. 

United Airlines and Alaska Airlines are two of the biggest users of the MAX 9. The plane in Friday’s incident had only recently entered service, after being certified by the FAA in November. 

The MAX has been a focus for customers and regulators since October 2018, when a MAX 8 crashed into the Java Sea minutes after takeoff from Jakarta, Indonesia, killing all 189 people aboard. Months later a MAX 8 operated by Ethiopian Airlines crashed, killing 157.

Investigators largely blamed a new flight-control system known as MCAS for overriding pilot commands and pushing the planes into fatal nosedives in the crashes. While the MAX was grounded, Boeing and regulators devised fixes to the system that added safeguards aimed at preventing it from overpowering pilots.

The FAA and Boeing have said they have focused their efforts to give priority to air safety. Despite Boeing’s recent manufacturing snafus, airlines are eager to get newer MAX models, which are more fuel-efficient than older aircraft they are retiring. In recent months, Boeing has signed several billion-dollar contracts, including from Lufthansa and Ryanair. 