Boeing Picks a Front-Runner to Be Its Next CEO
Stephanie Pope promoted to operating chief, making her the likely successor to CEO David Calhoun
By 
Sharon Terlep
Follow
 and 
Emily Glazer
Follow
Updated Dec. 11, 2023 7:41 am ET





Gift unlocked article

Listen

(4 min)



Boeing’s board met in recent days to discuss top executives that could eventually succeed the current CEO. Photo: Cfoto/Zuma Press
Boeing BA -1.32%decrease; red down pointing triangle is elevating Stephanie Pope to become its No. 2 executive, setting her up as the heir apparent to Chief Executive David Calhoun as the plane maker prepares for its next leadership transition.

Pope, who heads Boeing’s services arm, was promoted to chief operating officer and will start in the newly created role on Jan. 1, the company said Monday. The Wall Street Journal reported Sunday that the three-decade Boeing veteran beat out other top executives for the role.

Boeing is making the change as Calhoun nears his retirement age, which was extended in 2021, and the company is in a more stable position, with some regulatory matters behind it and a rising stock price. Calhoun expects to remain in the top job at least one more year, some of the people said. 

Pope, 51 years old, has worked in various parts of the company, including stints as the finance chief of both the commercial airline business and services unit, which she helped form. The services unit, which she took over in 2022, generates about a quarter of the company’s revenue and is the only unit making a profit. 


Stephanie Pope will start as COO on Jan. 1. Photo: geoffroy van der hasselt/Agence France-Presse/Getty Images
Boeing’s board met in recent days to discuss top executives that could eventually succeed Calhoun. Also in the running were the company’s finance chief Brian West and commercial chief Stan Deal. 

West and Deal will remain with the company. Deal ushered the commercial unit through the MAX crisis, but is the oldest of the three executives. West, CFO since 2021, is respected on Wall Street and a relative newcomer to Boeing. He previously was CFO of financial-information provider Refinitiv.

The three business unit chiefs and the company’s chief engineer will report to Pope, while she and senior corporate functions will continue to report to Calhoun, Boeing said. Her successor to lead Boeing services will be named later.

Calhoun, a Boeing board member since 2009, took over as CEO following the ouster of Dennis Muilenburg in late 2019. Under Calhoun, the MAX returned to service following an extended grounding but a number of other key projects have faced lengthy delays. 

Boeing shares have rallied nearly 30% this year and closed last week around $245, near their 52-week high. The stock is still down more than 40% from its record high of $440 set in March 2019.

The Covid-19 pandemic led to a steep decline in orders for new planes before demand sharply recovered, leaving its factories rushing to make enough planes to cater to demand for postpandemic travel. 

In recent months quality issues at suppliers have stymied those efforts, though the company has said it expects to begin meeting production targets by the end of this year.

The company said in October that it expects to substantially increase production by the end of the year, and analysts have said in recent weeks that it appears the company succeeded in doing so. 

In a regulatory filing earlier this year, Boeing said decisions by Calhoun about the management of the new 777X jetliner contributed to delays in that program. It also said those decisions were in Boeing’s long-term interest.

Boeing’s board this year awarded Calhoun a stock award worth about $5 million, which vests in 2025, to recognize “continued confidence in Mr. Calhoun’s strong leadership” and to retain him. The board also declined to award a $7 million performance bonus in part because of 777X delays. 