Boeing to Sell at Least $10 Billion in Shares to Plug Cash Drain
Jet maker moves to raise much needed cash and secures new credit line amid paralyzing machinist strike
By 
Sharon Terlep
Updated Oct. 15, 2024 5:08 pm ET




329

Gift unlocked article

Listen

(4 min)



A strike by Boeing’s largest union is exacerbating financial woes at the jet maker. Photo: david ryder/Reuters
Burning through cash, Boeing BA 0.04%increase; green up pointing triangle secured a new credit line and moved to raise at least $10 billion by selling new shares, in hopes of demonstrating that it can weather its current crisis. 

The once mighty manufacturer has been hobbled this year by quality problems that surfaced after a midair mishap in January on a 737 MAX and more recently by a machinist strike that has halted production of most Boeing planes.

The company, in a pair of regulatory filings on Tuesday, told investors it could issue up to $25 billion in shares or debt during the next three years while also entering into a new $10 billion credit agreement with lenders.

Under the shelf registration, Boeing is expected to pursue a stock offering that raises around $10 billion, according to people familiar with the matter.

“These are two prudent steps to support the company’s access to liquidity,” Boeing said. Boeing shares, which began the year around $250, rose 2% in Tuesday trading to around $152. Analysts said they were pleased that Boeing was addressing its near-term cash crunch while laying groundwork to raise more money in the next few years.

The strike, which began last month, is exacerbating financial woes at the jet maker, which last turned a profit in 2018. Its operations had been burning through about $1 billion a month before the strike.

Boeing ended September with $10.3 billion in cash and securities, close to the minimum amount the company has said it needs to operate. Analysts estimate the strike is costing the manufacturer at least $1 billion a month.

The new $10 billion credit agreement is in addition to about $10 billion in existing, untapped revolving credit agreements. Boeing has $45 billion in net debt.

Credit-rating firms have warned that the company needed to raise capital and that its debt could be downgraded to junk status.

The company on Friday said it would cut roughly 17,000 jobs and warned of deeper losses amid the machinists’ strike, which has halted production of most of Boeing’s planes, including its bestselling 737. Negotiations between Boeing and union leaders broke down last week, dimming hopes of a quick end to the strike.

“Our business is in a difficult position, and it is hard to overstate the challenges we face together,” Boeing Chief Executive Kelly Ortberg said in a message to employees last week about the layoff plan. “We need to be clear-eyed about the work we face and realistic about the time it will take to achieve key milestones.” 

Boeing slowed production of 737 jets after the Jan. 5 door-plug blowout on an Alaska Airlines flight, amid scrutiny from regulators and airlines about the company’s quality controls. An investigation found that workers at Boeing’s factory failed to replace critical bolts on the door plug panel.

The company has been struggling with production slowdowns on other models because of supplier shortages and other issues. Its defense business, which makes F-15 jet fighters and Chinook helicopters for the Pentagon, is also unprofitable. Boeing’s Starliner spacecraft faces an uncertain future after technical issues left two astronauts stuck on the International Space Station. 

The plane maker’s 33,000-member machinists union walked out on Sept. 13 after rejecting a labor deal that would have offered 25% wage increases over four years, bolstered retirement pay and guaranteed that Boeing would build its next airplane in the unionized Pacific Northwest. The agreement fell short of the 40% pay increase the union had sought. 