Boeing Secures Order for 150 Max Jets, A Boost Amid U.S. Grounding
Plane maker’s shares rose in premarket trading on sizable order from Akasa Air
By Kimberley Kao and 
Ben Otto
Follow
Jan. 18, 2024 2:10 am ET





Gift unlocked article

Listen

(2 min)


Can Boeing Repair the $12 Billion Hole in Its Reputation?
You may also like
Can Boeing Repair the $12 Billion Hole in Its Reputation?
Can Boeing Repair the $12 Billion Hole in Its Reputation?
Play video: Can Boeing Repair the $12 Billion Hole in Its Reputation?
The FAA has grounded some Boeing 737 Max 9 planes after a door plug fell from an Alaska Airlines flight. Now, other airlines are reporting “loose bolts” in their Boeing aircraft. WSJ’s George Downs explores what the accident means for Boeing and whether the company can afford another setback. Photo composite: NTSB/George Downs
Boeing BA -1.19%decrease; red down pointing triangle said it had agreed to deliver 150 of its 737 MAX aircraft to India’s Akasa Air, providing a vote of confidence in one of the industry’s fastest-growing markets as the plane maker faces pressure from regulators over a structural failure involving a different variant of its MAX jets.

Akasa Air, India’s newest airline, said Thursday that it will acquire a mix of single-aisle MAX 10 and MAX 8-200 jets, boosting its overall Boeing order book to more than 200 as it seeks to expand to international destinations. Deliveries are slated through 2032.

Boeing shares were about 2.0% higher in premarket trading.


An Akasa Air passenger aircraft taxis on the tarmac at Chhatrapati Shivaji International Airport in Mumbai, India. Photo: francis mascarenhas/Reuters
The deal is Boeing’s first major order win since a door plug blew out on an Alaska Airlines 737 MAX 9 jet midair earlier this month. The Federal Aviation Administration grounded about 170 MAX 9 jets after the accident and emergency landing. On Wednesday, it said the aircraft would be barred from carrying passengers until it studied data related to inspections of the plane’s door plugs.

The Akasa Air order doesn’t include the MAX 9 variant of the fuel-efficient family of jets.

Akasa Air, which placed its first order for Boeing MAX aircraft in 2021 and launched in August 2022, currently has a fleet of 22 jets. The low-cost airline offers services to 18 cities across India and plans to expand into the Middle East and Southeast Asia.

Its order comes after a raft of megadeals in India’s fast-growing aviation market. Last year, Air India ordered 470 jets from Boeing and Airbus, the largest deal for commercial aircraft in aviation history until several months later, when discount airline IndiGo made a deal for 500 Airbus jets.