United, Alaska Find Loose Parts on Some Boeing 737 MAX 9 Jets
Investigators say a door plug on Alaska Airlines 1282 came loose from fittings meant to hold it to the plane
By 
Andrew Tangel
, 
Alison Sider
, 
Sharon Terlep
 and 
Nancy Keates
Updated Jan. 9, 2024 9:55 am ET




899

Gift unlocked article

Listen

(6 min)


Investigators Probing if Alaska Airlines Door Plug Was Properly Bolted
You may also like

A door plug blew out of an Alaska Airlines jet midair after moving off a set of stops designed to keep it attached to the plane, investigators said on Monday. United Airlines said it also discovered loose parts on its Boeing 737 MAX 9 jets. Photo: National Transportation Safety Board/AFP/Getty Images
United Airlines and Alaska Airlines have discovered loose parts on Boeing BA -1.12%decrease; red down pointing triangle 737 MAX 9 jets that they have inspected after a near-catastrophe on a flight Friday, signaling Boeing’s issues go beyond the aircraft that made an emergency landing.

The disclosures came shortly before investigators at the National Transportation Safety Board said that dangerous episode on an Alaska Airlines jet occurred because an emergency exit-sized door plug blew out at around 16,000 feet after somehow moving off a set of stops that are designed to keep it attached to the plane.

The four bolts designed to keep the plug from moving off the stops were missing, they said, adding that they would work to determine whether the bolts had ever even been installed.

What’s News
The Wall Street Journal Whats News
Airlines Find Loose Parts on More Boeing Jets


Subscribe
Add to Queue
Explore Audio Center
United said earlier that its inspections “had found instances that appear to relate to installation issues in the door plug—for example, bolts that needed additional tightening.” The airline said the issues would be remedied by maintenance staff as it awaits approval to return the planes to service. 

Alaska said earlier that initial reports from technicians preparing the MAX 9 fleet for inspections accessed the plug area and indicated loose hardware was visible on some planes. The carrier has 65 MAX 9 jets. “Any findings will be fully addressed in a matter that satisfies our safety standards and FAA compliance,” the airline said, referring to the Federal Aviation Administration.

NTSB officials declined Monday to address the flaws found by the airline inspections and said that, while they could broaden their probe, they are still focused on what exactly caused the door plug to move out of position.

“We cannot tell you at this time how or why,” NTSB Chair Jennifer Homendy said. “We do not have that information. We will have that information. It’s going to take time.”

Boeing said it was staying in close contact with airlines as they conduct the inspections “and will help address any and all findings” to ensure each aircraft meets safety and design specifications.

Boeing CEO David Calhoun and other top executives will address staff on Tuesday afternoon in the wake of the incident.

The FAA issued an emergency order Saturday temporarily grounding dozens of MAX 9 jets after the door plug, which closes off an unused emergency exit, blew out of the Alaska Airlines plane shortly after takeoff with 177 passengers and crew aboard.

Investigators are looking at the fastening system used to secure a plug for an unused door that blew off an Alaska Airlines plane during flight.

Door plugs are secured by

pushing the plug down on spring-loaded hinges,

closing the plug

pushing the plug up into place on guide tracks and securing it with bolts

1

2

3

2

3

As the plug is pushed up

into place, a guide track

on the plug slips onto a

roller pin affixed to the

plane, where it is locked

with a bolt and pin.

Additional bolts are used

on the hinges

1

Source: Boeing
Adrienne Tong and Peter Champelli/THE WALL STREET JOURNAL
The grounding snarled travel, resulting in hundreds of flight cancellations as carriers including Alaska and United, two of the biggest operators of the MAX 9, took their planes out of service.

On Monday, the FAA said it had approved procedures for airlines to inspect their grounded MAX 9 jets, a step toward clearing the way for the planes to return to service. Boeing also sent out a memo to airlines with instructions to check MAX 9 aircraft with the emergency-door plug. 

The FAA declined to detail the procedures or why air-safety regulators believed the inspections would prevent a recurrence while investigators are still trying to determine what caused the accident. Homendy said Sunday it was too early to determine whether a manufacturing error might have led to the door plug’s failure. 

On a call Monday with airlines, Boeing executives said the FAA directive doesn’t require inspections of its older 737-900ER jets, many of which operated by carriers including Delta Air Lines and United have had the twin door plugs installed. The smaller MAX 8 model doesn’t feature the plugs.


United said it expects significant flight cancellations to continue. Photo: Justin Sullivan/Getty Images
Executives told customers that the plugs were being inspected on undelivered MAX 9 jets at its Renton, Wash., assembly plant and at the Wichita, Kan., factory run by Spirit AeroSystems SPR 0.57%increase; green up pointing triangle, which installs the plugs in fuselages shipped by rail to Boeing. 

Homendy said the NTSB had invited Spirit and a union that represents much of its workforce to join the investigation as official parties. The supplier didn’t immediately respond to a request for comment late Monday.

The incident wiped around $12 billion from Boeing’s market value on Monday as its shares lost 8%. Spirit AeroSystems shares declined 11%. The two stocks were each down less than 1% in premarket trading Tuesday.

Boeing has been dogged by various factory problems in recent years, and its production has come under tighter scrutiny since two earlier crashes of its smaller 737 MAX 8 jets. On Monday, executives told staff in the company’s Renton facility to halt the factory and attend a meeting to discuss safety issues.

United and Alaska said Monday that they were still waiting on the FAA to give them the final go-ahead to inspect their planes. United said its planes remained grounded Monday and it expects significant flight cancellations to continue Tuesday. 

Alaska said planes would be inspected thoroughly in accordance with detailed instructions from the FAA and Boeing, and would require all findings be documented and reported to the FAA. The airline said those steps will have to be completed before planes can return to service.


A National Transportation Safety Board member examining the fuselage of the Alaska Airlines Flight 1282 Boeing 737 MAX 9 in Portland, Ore., on Sunday. Photo: NTSB/Getty Images
NTSB officials released other details from their probe late Monday. After raising questions about a cockpit warning light that had indicated issues with the aircraft’s cabin pressurization system, Homendy said the system was designed to be triple-redundant and worked as intended. There was no indication it had any role in the door-plug blowout, she said.

During the incident, the airplane’s cockpit door blew open—also apparently by design, but that wasn’t known to the flight crew, Homendy said. She said Boeing agreed to revise its manuals to reflect that cockpit doors are designed to open during rapid decompression. A Boeing spokeswoman declined to comment.

Homendy stressed how little information the crew had about what was happening and how difficult it was for them to communicate. “This was a really significant event with zero information at the time,” she said.