Airbus Shatters Record for Jet Orders as Demand Soars
European plane maker sees bookings more than double from previous year
By 
Benjamin Katz
Updated Jan. 11, 2024 2:43 pm ET





Gift unlocked article

Listen

(5 min)



Airbus overtook Boeing as the world’s biggest plane maker several years ago. Photo: Cfoto/Zuma Press
LONDON—Airbus AIR -0.19%decrease; red down pointing triangle, the world’s biggest plane maker, smashed its near-decade old record for the highest number of orders in a single year, as airlines scramble to secure the limited availability of new aircraft.

The company said it had booked 2,319 gross orders last year, more than twice the number in 2022 and 29.1% higher than its 1,796 record set in 2014.

Airlines are throwing down billions of dollars to buy new planes to upgrade and expand their fleets as they emerge from the pandemic’s doldrums to a year of record profits at some carriers. That has been spurred by a general shortage of planes and overwhelming demand from passengers that led to a surge in ticket prices.

Carriers have also been eager to snatch up availability from Airbus and Boeing BA -1.48%decrease; red down pointing triangle where they can. Airbus, for instance, is mostly sold out for its popular A320neo—its rival to Boeing’s 737 MAX—until the early 2030s. Both plane-making giants have been battling to ramp up production and retool their supply chains after steep cuts each made at the start of the pandemic. The two nemeses have an effective duopoly in the global production of commercial airliners.

As a result, some airlines and leasing companies are committing to buying planes more than 10 years in advance. That is longer than usual, and executives say it reflects concerns over the challenging ramp-up and persistent production delays, as well as efforts to catch up on output lost during the pandemic that has left many carriers flying older planes for longer. 

Newsletter Sign-up

What’s News

Catch up on the headlines, understand the news and make better decisions, free in your inbox daily. Enjoy a free article in every edition.


Preview

Subscribe
The jump in orders included some mega deals, including a 500-aircraft order from Indian discount carrier Indigo and a 470-jet order from a rejuvenated Air India that was split between Airbus and Boeing near the start of the year. In December, the company booked a 220-plane order from Turkish Airlines, and sold 153 planes to Britain’s EasyJet and 100 jets to leasing company Avolon.

“Travel is back and there is serious momentum,” said Christian Scherer, who has led Airbus’s commercial aircraft sales team since 2018 and is the company’s newly appointed head of its planemaking business. He said Airbus had been expecting travel to recover to prepandemic levels between 2023 and 2025, but the company had seen “a full recovery for all intents and purposes” last year amid the surge in demand for both single-aisle and wide-body models.

Airbus also indicated that it was rising above some production challenges that had led it to cut back the steepness of its production ramp, including issues with one of its engine suppliers, Pratt & Whitney. Airbus Chief Executive Guillaume Faury said the company was on track to meet an aggressive target to build more of its best-selling aircraft each month than it did before the pandemic by 2026.

The comments contrast with a new scandal that has been enveloping Boeing since the weekend amid an investigation into how a panel on its 737 MAX 9 blew out during an Alaska Airlines flight last Friday. The incident has ratcheted up scrutiny by Boeing and regulators of possible quality lapses in its factories and in its supply chain.

The Federal Aviation Administration on Thursday formally notified Boeing it was investigating whether the door-plug blowout on an Alaska Airlines 737 MAX 9 resulted from the plane maker’s failure to ensure its products met government-approved designs and safety requirements. “This incident should have never happened and it cannot happen again,” the agency said.

“We will cooperate fully and transparently with the FAA and the NTSB on their investigations,” Boeing said in a statement.

Boeing announced its own annual order and delivery figures on Tuesday to little fanfare amid the fallout from the Alaska incident. It said it had booked 1,456 gross orders in 2023, the company’s highest order tally since 2014. Orders net of cancellations and model conversions was 1,314, compared with 2,094 net orders at Airbus. 

The U.S. manufacturing giant didn’t give an overall target for deliveries last year, but said it had handed over 528 aircraft to customers over the year. That compared with 735 delivered by Airbus in 2023 against a target of around 720.

“What we achieved in 2023, despite a complex and volatile environment, is exceptional,” Scherer said, adding thatAirbus had also reached a new record with its backlog of unbuilt orders reaching 8,598 jets. He said the company had a responsibility to deliver those aircraft “on time” and “on quality.”

Airbus overtook Boeing as the world’s biggest plane maker in 2019 following the second crash of the 737 MAX that led to a global grounding and subsequent pause in production of the Boeing jet.