Boeing Stock Fell. Why Analysts Are Still Backing Shares.
By 
Al Root
Follow
Updated Oct 14, 2024, 5:08 pm EDT / Original Oct 14, 2024, 5:10 am EDT





Reprints


Boeing 737 MAX production has been shut down by a labor strike that just entered its fifth week. (Geoffroy Van der Hasselt/AFP/Getty Images)
Boeing stock fell Monday after dropping some big news on Friday evening.

Despite recent woes, including quality problems, profitability problems, management turnover, and a labor strike, Wall Street, for the most part, backs the company.

Shares of the commercial aerospace firm traded as low as $146.02, but closed at $148.99, down 1.4% on Monday, while the S&P 500 gained 0.8% and the Dow Jones Industrial Average added 0.5%.

The move comes after Boeing announced on Friday a huge third-quarter loss, and layoffs impacting some 17,000 workers as a labor strike that has paralyzed production in the Pacific Northwest enters a fifth week.

The layoff and losses aren’t mainly due to the strike. Instead, they reflect some decisions taken by new CEO Kelly Ortberg to put the company on more secure footing once the strike ends.

“Our business is in a difficult position, and it is hard to overstate the challenges we face together,” said Ortberg in an emailed statement to employees. “Beyond navigating our current environment, restoring our company requires tough decisions and we will have to make structural changes to ensure we can stay competitive and deliver for our customers over the long term.”

In a separate statement on Friday, Boeing said that it will report sales of $17.8 billion and a loss of almost $10 per share for the third quarter. Wall Street was looking for $18.4 billion in sales and a loss closer to $1.40 per share, according to FactSet.

Included in that loss are some $5 billion in one-time charges for Boeing’s delayed 777X program and ailing defense programs.

“It shouldn’t come as a total surprise that Defense would have another rough quarter after business CEO Ted Colbert left the company on Sept. 20,” wrote Melius Research analyst Robert Spingarn in a Sunday report, adding that the pre-announcement makes it more likely Boeing will issue equity before the strike is over.

Boeing management consistently says that maintaining its investment-grade credit rating is a priority. Boeing’s debt is rated BBB- by S&P Global, the last rung on the investment-grade ladder. Many Wall Street analysts believe that issuing stock to pay down debt and build extra liquidity will be needed to keep that rating stable.

An initial raise of $10 billion is the current Wall Street consensus, based on various reports.

Spingarn rates Boeing stock at Hold with a $188 price target. Vertical Research Partners analyst Rob Stallard rates shares at Hold with a $160 price target.

He appears to have considered a Sell rating. “While slapping a Sell rating on a stock has ramifications, if Boeing were any other company it would have been a prime candidate for this rating some time ago,” wrote Stallard on Saturday. “But what keeps us from the Sell is the latent desire that remains among portfolio managers to buy the stock during an aerospace up-cycle.”

They don’t want to miss the opportunity for a turnaround either, added Stallard.

Seaport analyst Richard Safran went further than “don’t sell.” He sees three reasons to Buy Boeing stock after the third-quarter earnings update.

“Aside from Government intervention putting Boeing on the can’t-fail list,” a lot of bad news is already reflected in the stock price, the valuation is compelling, and two catalysts are coming up, wrote Safran in a Monday report.

The two catalysts are the end of the strike and the capital raise. As for valuation, he sees “peak” annual free cash flow generated by the company could be north of $10 billion. That would give the stock a free cash flow yield of about 11%. The S&P 500 trades for about a 4% yield based on 2025 numbers.

Newsletter Sign-up

The Barron's Daily

A morning briefing on what you need to know in the day ahead, including exclusive commentary from Barron's and MarketWatch writers.


Preview

Subscribe
Safran rates shares Buy and has a $207 price target for the stock.

Investors shouldn’t be surprised by an equity raise. And they were aware of the strike and the problems at Boeing Defense. Investors, however, weren’t sure what Ortberg would do about it. Significant layoffs are part of his plan.

It will be interesting to see how investors react to that in the coming days and weeks.

More analysts agree with him than disagree. Overall, almost 60% of analysts covering Boeing stock rate shares Buy. The average Buy-rating ratio for shares in the S&P 500 is about 55%.

The average analyst price target for Boeing stock is about $199. That’s one thing that’s been slipping on the Street. Analysts have cut their price target from about $270 at the start of the year, and from about $214 before the strike began.

Coming into Monday trading, Boeing stock was down about 42% year to date. Shares were down about 39% since an emergency-door plug blew out of a 737 MAX 9 jet while in flight. That incident has resulted in slower production and more regulatory oversight.