What Fliers Need to Know About the Grounding of Some 737 MAX Flights
Travelers with upcoming flights on Alaska, United may be affected after Alaska flight was forced to make emergency landing
By 
Allison Pohle
 and 
Dawn Gilbertson
Updated Jan. 10, 2024 2:28 pm ET





Gift unlocked article

Listen

(6 min)



Alaska Air and United said they grounded all of their MAX 9 jets as they awaited details about possible additional work that may be required to comply with the FAA’s order. Photo: Stephen Brashear/Getty Images
Travelers will face continued flight cancellations due to the grounding of the Boeing BA -2.79%decrease; red down pointing triangle 737 MAX 9.

On Wednesday, Alaska Airlines canceled all MAX 9 flights through Saturday as it conducts inspections on the aircraft. United, which has the most MAX 9 planes of any U.S. carrier, has canceled flights on that aircraft, as well. The airlines have waivers in place through Saturday for travelers originally scheduled to fly on the planes.

The fallout stems from a Friday incident on an Alaska flight from Portland, Ore., to Ontario, Calif. An emergency exit-sized door plug blew out at around 16,000 feet.

What Unfolded Inside Alaska Airlines Flight Before Emergency Landing
You may also like

A section of an Alaska Airlines flight ripped away shortly after takeoff on Friday, forcing the plane to make an emergency landing. Here’s a timeline of what unfolded after the aircraft’s midair incident. Photo: Instagram/@strawberrvy/Reuters
The Federal Aviation Administration grounded 171 Boeing MAX 9s on Saturday and ordered immediate inspections. United and Alaska have discovered loose parts on MAX 9 jets that they have inspected.

Travelers are once again asking about the safety—and future—of their flights on Boeing’s 737 MAX.

Here is what to know if you are flying soon:

Who flies the Boeing 737 MAX 9?
United and Alaska are the U.S. carriers that most frequently fly the MAX 9. United had about 8,000 flights scheduled with the MAX 9 for January, while Alaska had about 5,000, according to Cirium, an aviation analytics company. 

Southwest Airlines, the nation’s largest domestic carrier by passengers, is a big MAX operator, with 220 MAX 8s. It doesn’t fly the MAX 9.

Are United and Alaska still flying the MAX 9? 
United and Alaska initially said Saturday that some of their MAX 9 jets had already undergone the necessary inspections and were clear to keep flying. Alaska said it had determined that 18 of its 65 MAX 9 jets had “in-depth and thorough plug door inspections” during recent heavy maintenance visits.

But later Saturday, both airlines said they would need to ground all of their MAX 9 jets as they awaited details about possible additional work that may be required to comply with the order the FAA issued that day.

United said its 79 Max 9 jets are parked while it awaits further instructions from Boeing and the FAA. Meanwhile, the airline has taken initial steps, including removing an internal panel to gain access to the emergency door.

Alaska said it was working with the FAA to ensure its inspections meet detailed requirements, but said the process would take more time and that travel disruptions could continue through at least midweek. 

What if I’m due to fly Alaska or United in the coming days? 
The airlines will notify passengers whose flights may be affected by the groundings. Travelers are generally offered other flight options or are eligible for a refund if the airline cancels the flight. Pay attention to emails or other alerts from your airline. Expect long waits to reach airlines by phone given the heavy volume of calls. 

Alaska said between 110 and 150 flights a day are affected by the cancellation. Travelers with affected flights can go online to view options and rebook or request a voucher for future travel or a refund. The airline has a flexible travel policy in place for people who originally planned to travel through Saturday. 

United said it is working with affected customers to place them on other aircraft. The airline also has a waiver in place for people originally traveling through Saturday. The airline says it has been able to swap aircraft to avoid canceling more flights.

Some international carriers, including Panama’s Copa Airlines and Mexico’s Aeromexico, said they were temporarily grounding their MAX 9 jets pending the necessary inspection.

How is the 737 MAX 9 different from other planes?
It is a slightly longer and newer version of the more popular MAX 8 model, which was involved in two prior fatal accidents. Alaska’s MAX 9 planes have 178 seats. 

How many MAX 9s are out there?
United has 79 of the planes in service, while Alaska has 65, according to Cirium. International airlines fly them, too, including Copa, Aeromexico, Turkish Airlines and Icelandair. 

How do I know what kind of plane I’m on? 
Look under details when you book a flight or in your reservation confirmation. For the MAX 9, it is typically listed as a Boeing 737-9 or Boeing 737 MAX 9, different from the Boeing 737-900. Keep in mind that airlines frequently change aircraft.

What other issues have MAX planes had?
In 2018 and 2019, there were fatal crashes of the 737 MAX 8 on Ethiopian Airlines and Lion Air, an Indonesian carrier. The crashes killed 346 people on the two planes. The accidents drew scrutiny from federal regulators and lawmakers. A key issue in both crashes centered on an automated flight-control system.

The FAA grounded the MAX in March 2019, joining aviation authorities around the world. The FAA lifted the grounding in the U.S. in November 2020 after issuing a series of safety directives. American Airlines was the first U.S. airline to return the plane to service, in December 2020. United followed in February 2021, and Southwest in March 2021.