For This Boeing Family, the Job Is the Same. The Payoff Isn’t
Working at the jet maker gave the Merwins a middle-class life near Seattle, but they say ‘the company is not that ticket anymore'
By Sharon TerlepFollow
 | Photographs by Grant Hindsley for WSJ
Sept. 30, 2024 5:30 am ET

Save

Share

Text
448 Responses

Explore Audio Center
Three generations of Merwin family men have built their careers in Boeing’s BA 0.61%increase; green up pointing triangle factories. 

Tony Merwin, a 30-year Boeing veteran who groomed his three sons for jobs there, is considering something he once believed was unthinkable: “Right now, the way this company is, I would not steer my grandkids toward this company.”

American factory jobs used to promise a middle-class life for blue-collar workers like Merwin and his sons, now in their 30s. But that is no longer true for many manufacturing workers—even as presidential candidates Donald Trump and Kamala Harris have campaigned on reviving such jobs.

Seattle​36.1 points higher than the​U.S. average in 2023

That tension is behind the strike at Boeing, where the average machinist makes around $75,000 and wages haven’t kept up with the cost of living in the Pacific Northwest, now one of the nation’s priciest regions.

“I’ve watched my kids struggle to have what they have,” said Merwin, 58 years old, a parts inspector who works at Boeing’s Auburn, Wash., plant. Merwin will receive a pension when he retires; his youngest son won’t. “The opportunity for people coming into this company is not the same as what it used to be.”

Some 33,000 members of Boeing’s largest union have been on strike since Sept. 13, costing the jet maker hundreds of millions of dollars a week and imperiling its turnaround effort. Members overwhelmingly rejected a contract that would have raised pay by 25% over four years. Boeing sweetened its offer to a 30% increase, which the union said still falls short. 

The union says Boeing, in the past decade, has raised wages by 8%—not enough when inflation has increased nationally by more than 46% in the same period. 

Workers are seeing real declines in their standard of living, and that is driving a harder line on union contracts at Boeing and elsewhere, said Rep. Adam Smith, (D., Wash.) who has represented the region since 1997. “Your wages simply didn’t keep up with the cost of housing, education, energy, everything,” he said. “It’s not just the wages they are making, but the expense of the world around them.”

Moving west with $200 in the bank

Tony Merwin was an infant when his parents moved the family from South Dakota in the 1960s to work at Boeing.
The Merwin family’s connection to Boeing started with Tony’s father, Ray Merwin, who in the 1960s was living in South Dakota and working at a gold mine. Ray’s uncle had moved to Seattle in the early 1960s for a job at Boeing, which at the time was on a hiring spree. 

Within the decade, Boeing would construct its sprawling Everett factory, where the company has built planes—from the 747 that introduced air travel to the masses to the 787 Dreamliner—before it moved all production of the 787 to South Carolina. 

When Tony was an infant, a relative called his father to join him at the factory. “My parents packed everything they had into a utility trailer. They drove out here with less than $200 to their names,” Tony said.

The family’s move, in 1966, started nearly six decades of Merwins working at Boeing. Tony’s mother, Maria Merwin, also took a job as a clerk at the jet maker as she raised Tony and his three siblings. 

For the young family, Boeing was a way out of low-income, dangerous mining work. Tony recalls growing up in a newly constructed three-bedroom rambler, with both of his parents working hard but not struggling.

Microsoft riches reshape the region

By 2020, Seattle and the surrounding area had among the nation’s priciest homes and least-affordable communities. Photo: Joel W. Rogers/CORBIS/Corbis via Getty Images
As Boeing churned out commercial jetliners in the suburbs of Seattle, the surrounding area blossomed. New subdivisions cropped up, populated by ranch and split-level homes.

Microsoft moved there in 1979 and went public seven years later, birthing a wave of young tech millionaires. Jeff Bezos founded Amazon the following decade. As those companies ballooned into trillion-dollar giants, a wave of smaller tech players set up shop. 

The region’s sleepy Scandinavian communities transformed. Multimillion-dollar homes filled once-open land and glittering condo towers cropped up along the lakeshore. By 2020, Seattle and the surrounding area had among the nation’s priciest homes and least-affordable communities.

The median worker at Microsoft in 2023 made nearly $200,000. The average wage at an Amazon warehouse is $22 an hour—no college degree required, compared with about $21 on average to start on the line at Boeing.


The assembly line at the sprawling Boeing plant in Everett, Wash., in 1969. Photo: Collection Bernard Crochet/Photo12/Universal Images Group via Getty Images
Buying a house for $155,000
At 23, Tony was hired as a wing line mechanic on a military plane. He jumped between jobs at Boeing, moving back to more physically demanding manufacturing work when he needed the overtime or more job security. 

For Tony, the work provided a comfortable middle-class life, where bonuses and overtime paychecks went toward family vacations, band trips and college tuition for his daughter, who now has a master’s degree.

“Everybody was able to pay their bills so, when a bonus came, it was, ‘I’m going to take a vacation, or I’m going to build a back deck,’” he said. “Now everybody is depending on a bonus as a stopgap for what they can’t afford.”

Boeing Union Votes to Strike, Halting 737 Production
You may also like
Boeing Union Votes to Strike, Halting 737 Production
Boeing Union Votes to Strike, Halting 737 Production
Play video: Boeing Union Votes to Strike, Halting 737 Production
Boeing workers voted to strike, shutting down production on a range of jets. WSJ’s Sharon Terlep breaks down the reasons behind the strike and what it means for the struggling aerospace giant. Photo: Chona Kasinger for WSJ
By 1999, married with four adolescents, Tony upsized his house, paying $155,000 for a three-bedroom on a large corner lot. His children remember their father working often but also having a lot. 

“We were able to survive without any problems,” said his second son Andy Merwin, who has worked at Boeing for 13 years. “I remember asking my dad how he did that.” 

Andy, 38, initially was an electrician and later moved into a planning job, represented by a different union. He later got an engineering degree.

A father of four, Andy makes $105,000 a year including overtime and lives about 30 miles away. To pay their mortgage, the family also relies on income from his wife, who teaches piano.  

The young family is considering moving to Utah where the cost of living is lower and Andy said he thinks he could find another aerospace job.


The Boeing job provided Tony Merwin, grilling, with a middle-class life where bonuses and overtime paychecks went to family vacations.
Rising rents and a $22 turkey leg
Tony got divorced in 2014 and moved into an apartment with his brother. He recalls the sticker shock at the $1,300 monthly rent—not much less than his prior mortgage.

Tony remarried and, a few years later, the couple moved into a two-bedroom apartment. Rent rose each year, and in 2019—with their rent closing in on $1,800 a month—the couple decided to buy their own place. His wife is disabled and can’t work, he said. 

They bought a single-wide mobile home on a spacious tract of land, roughly a 45-minute drive from work. It cost $235,000. Tony, who made $120,510 this past year, including overtime and a bonus, said they could have swung something slightly higher-end on less land, but opted for the mobile home so they could keep a travel trailer and two classic Mustangs, for which storage had become too costly. 

Almost as shocking to Tony as home prices was the $22 price tag on a turkey leg at the state fair, where he took his wife in September to see TobyMac. He remembers paying $11 last time the couple went in 2018.

“This sounds like first-world problems,” he said. “But this was never an issue before. I used to be able to take care of a family of six in a really nice house. The company is not that ticket anymore.”



Patrick Merwin, like his brothers, served in the Air Force before he joined Boeing. Andy Merwin, right, has been at Boeing for 13 years but is thinking of moving to Utah.
Longer commutes and overtime
For Tony’s sons, Boeing remains a path to homeownership and stability. But it comes with increasing trade offs—long commutes, stressful work and shrinking buying power. 

His youngest son, Patrick Merwin, 36, joined the Air Force at his father’s urging as did his older brothers. Unlike them, Patrick said, he hoped to avoid Boeing.

After his six-year military stint, newly married, Patrick took a job at an aerospace maintenance operation in North Carolina. He worked there a few years until getting laid off. The couple had two children, and he needed stability. 

His family counseled him to return home—and to Boeing. Patrick went to work for a contractor and eventually got hired by the jet maker at its 737 factory in Renton, Wash. At $20 an hour, Boeing paid $9 an hour less than his contractor gig, but he could get more overtime and eventually work up the pay scale.

Patrick said he saved money by initially living with his sister and working close to 500 overtime hours his first year. Now, six years after his hire, he makes $46.71 an hour, the top rate for an aircraft test technician. He pays a mortgage on a three-bedroom home, now worth more than $500,000, about an hour south of Renton.

SHARE YOUR THOUGHTS
What obligation do manufacturing companies like Boeing have to their workers? Join the conversation below.

He still works overtime, including most weekends, but he switched to a lower-paying shift so he can spend more time with his children and drive them to and from school. 

“We are able to stay afloat,” Patrick said. “But not necessarily to thrive.”

Tony, Patrick and Tony’s oldest son Josh Merwin, who also works at Boeing, recently stood together on a picket line outside the Renton factory.

Across the street is a strip mall, called The Landing, sitting on land that once belonged to Boeing. In the glow lights from the LA Fitness gym, Tony reminisced about joining a picket line as a teenager in 1977 with his father. 

“This company has zero future,” Tony said, “if it cannot go back to being able to attract the best and brightest.”